— -------•—	■	.. '	-'4
‘c	\
i	.	.
« ■■■ '1
1-.. •
■	. • - ‘	. '	■ c -
S'-; ,	■ ■
I
1	■'-	■’ •	” '	■ '. ■ TA/ i-
I - - • . ■ ' - ■ - V ■	■'■■ ;' ^ ■
ii . ■'.'. .’^	----——-------- ‘•'•■ >*S-‘ .• 1 t'^
1|t-'	•- f^r^'-^^^-- M
% ■ ■ ■■	the	rW'Jj‘^
GODFREY F. SINGER
1^	MEMORIAL	.Cc-SS
I	PRESENTED BY
MR. AN^RS. JACOB SINGER
^cc-'.	^-- :n	,	V
? ,'L	' ’	■	'*
' i' '	7	;	. ■■;•
: . A- -	■ ' ;'^L. S.
i	..;- i , L	0" .- "C
. . A ■ .
‘ •.	b, ■■ ■■ ^ V -"N
■	"f: : S '	; \ -
s	' "-■. V S V ■ .: ■
L, -i-;	-	•	!
■ - « .	■ _
' • V V ; ,7 .
^ y " -	. ^
N' \	: c: ,'. "	.
-•■ ■^■■. A\ '■■ ■ ^ ■ ■
:C-- ■<, - ^	^ h ■ .: :	-■	'
N ‘
■'AA '*■ . * ^ ' ci,:y ' ^
■^'h"''	■ S' ■ I ■
AC;b- S : ■^'r' .. ■ . -	•	■ '	■ ■ ■
L' '■	A
X - -	\	,	, . ' MA
-4=iffe - '■■
-	'•	’	• O'	'	• -	■ - '	' -
V.:	■“ ■'	'"-■	- -■' * ■'..	" To ';■■■■ "r
■;;:	.	■ ,S S
1 '. /' -	. - -	^ T . ' '■ -
^	‘-MiSAo ■ •-. ' •■.
' ■ T- ; - ^	.	.■ V^vT 'TT
rsc-hc ' '	■ ■	' ,■■'A o f'
- ’	■•	.,	. ‘	•	'f-*‘ -
■■' ■	: .'	C ■	■	.	_,;■:
•	• . .	c Sc ^	-■ -S ;■
» . • • ■* "' - : ■
•	■	:-:v-	^ '/•-	‘
i: .	'	■- ; ;	S
r	•	'
. ; ^ V.	^	^
«r- : .-c-	:	' •	.
t '
■	.	, ■	■	9	■
k .	■	■	■",^ir.---.
I' te - ^	'
: , i -
t	' '	•	-
»
F	- ,	,	'‘
I	.	.	^	' C ■	■	'
i ' -
' ' 1
^
" A: -	■ ■ ' ,
■ . > - X . ■	. ' . ^	; .	.
V	.	■ i '■	,' L' , 'L '	... -	•
■ - ' '
•y	:	*
-	.	'	■	.	iT'-'-
■ ' ■ ■
....
. •	■ i -'c
'	.	-	,' i c..	■	*
V	'	• ■ ., V '	(	’
‘	/ '.j -
V'	’	" \	. ’	■• .
■	■.'-7..'1	.	*	’	*	'i. 9
sC'	‘'	- • ', '	■ T ^	'	-
•' ,	^	•	,	■ 'i '■	'‘ '
V ■; „■' .'■■■■■'
a - ' ' ■ •*	‘	■""'	\	'
: ■^ "■■■:' , .,
c ■■ ■ .	■ ■" ; ^ 'M
.	' ■	' '	■.	• ■ h	- "
. '■f -	/	■ ■'	^ A ^
V s. " ; '■ -'. c '	:■■ / '	. ■ •.,;
S'-	..	/	- , ■ *	^ '
’	- .if	■ •	''’■■■. c . ■ .
. “ ^	■ .	-	- , ' c ' -	• hv1
^	^	‘	.	•	• -4*
. ■-	• ■ '■ ..	■	. c -
" A .	^	c " '	^	.
N	*	.	. '	- ^
AVt'	: J
'	- /'L '	'..i‘ :,;• '' . ■'■ •■ ' ■ '■ I
"‘■r'- 'C...	' S ,	V_
. ,	.,	^	^ ^ ^ t
■.-'•'• ■ •' ' ■■;■■•■-'	■ - . ■
. . ■	‘	.J ■	•• ' - '	. . - . •
K''ri--"'	'. •	■'	'
t-"V-^ ' T.	■■ Lr- 'Hi
„,:	vS S
'	■•s;c':.V V .	' C', ^ ■.	'•' '	,r f
■ ■ .V ' . ■	T-' ■*	. •' .	■	. • ■ f
.;■	• . ■	,	■ .	.	. -i
■■ .■ " ■ ..K'i ■■: * . .., ■ !
- - c i ••	: A
*. ‘Cv.rV* •	• '	•	•	•	-	^	.
V:i;- '■ L \ ,V /''f
' A ‘	'	. ■ V v'i ’ ' ~ - •. ■ ' * D”!
LETTERS
B E T W E E N
An ENGLISH LADY
AND
Her F R I E N D at P A R I S.
In which are contained
The M E M O I R S
O F.
Mrs. WILLIAMS.
v:_
•	' ■;, • ■'.	'■4
.. '	^	;■ - 'V
*	'•'	'	■'	•	-'.i f,
T '>	^A}: ' ' 'i“' ' r"	' ■■■■’< - ’ S
•	i i!'»- X _	.	t.4	jt
i ■ , V T a^NVT^ a:. . , .	.;' . ^
vS.; t" ■	'^ T p r T .D V-' n' f r
''■	i'■
■'	■ -	.. .'A	■	- '	^
.;:; NteC iii ci	-toil ■ ',.' ' 1
'. . \ ' ‘ ■ . ■.
if .ai;	oLM.? J.I -	.	- i.
2AIK O i/i 3. I.^ e:lT
/. ' tf . *’	. *'* . *	•	'	-1
■' ' ' t!
V '	■ - : . - V'.	’A '■ ■ ■; fK,
PA,. ■•’	,.	■ ■'•	• ■	. • .D ’ .
■ S ■■ F' ' ri	' ■ ■	■	:\ 1
Fr.	A-': '■’ •	.	■	,	• A. ;
'. b ■	■	' • i" T .	'
A.	’	A ■-'•■•	' '■ 1
■■■	i
V-'	^ ■ - . . n; .	-.	*. ■	'
'te ■ I ■ '	'	■	,	if\ ' i‘
■ K	-	' ' V^- ■ V	' N ■ ■ ■ '. 'i;
LETTERS
BETWEEN
An ENGLISH LADY
AND
Her FRIEND at PARIS.
In which are contained
The M E M O I R S
O F
Mrs. WILLIAMS.
By a L A D Y.
In T W O VOLUMES,
V O L. I.
DUBLIN:
Printed for J. Williams, J. Porter, R. Moncrieffe, and T. Walker.
«	MDCCLXX.
Ftji j Ch
-■ ' ■.	’	■'■■ ■-' oj ^
.'■	- ‘:.'-.- .L„ -	'■ ■ • r - -.f;
yxilj lidtAcvi A rF‘
•r*,	,	' -	'■	I
-N'- -.-.T . c.	, *
^-.A . —.	CK A .	.	^
"'c//'' - _	■	■	’	■■	'*	. '.^,^3
’-' 'S-i'.q Ki }.T a;: ~i;H -::H' •'; 'f
' • ■ - •	■ ' - ■	"	- V . ^
- V'- - ■'	' LmL-'i -‘■' -.;■ ij>.,Lv al y _ \ i
' C T I 6 U 'LLlLrT : ' 0 ,]
-’■•'♦■■ ■" ’ • ' ' ■ . 1 -• Al V . 'S ' • T o •	• .	. -•
' tev',	.	■	.	• ji
£M'A ljj..:vr	^ 'I
\. '____________STAc a"-:!' ■ 'I
~A a F d. . T, '
T;Hv. VT ‘A./ OAtk:.. ' / 'I
j U J 0, - ■ V . , J
:"^r 1 A-1: L; .■,	C-';	1
. ,^.AALAl V. ,.st: . -V N ' . • "F.-. ^A...T O Jd-C * ■ '	*	'!
.’ ■. ,;	:- ;■ "A	a/' ■ "N
^S-T 'A V. ■	■	'	’ I
'. t'A . " \	-. ‘ - -
PREFACE.
K^)§CT ‘^M confcious that^ amongst all my Sex, M I M I am the least calculated to shine in the
rf3	flgp
Novel stile; which, however, feems of late to be their Sphere. It is a Species of writing I never could draw any amufement from ; and, therefore^ am very little acquainted with ; and though I firmly believe the following Memoirs to be true, yet they bear So strong a reSemblance to many others, which have owed their birth only to the imagination of their Authors, that I fear they will not be esteemed So, but by the few, who may have had Some knowlege^ of the fa£ls related in them.
The defire of relieving a fellow creature in dif-trefs, engaged me to undertake a taste, which is ' every way inalogous both to my genius and taste,
j
, How 1 have Succeeded in the transtation of this '' work, no one will ever be able to judge ; a5 I can pofitively assert, that the original will never appear ' in its native drafs.
r
>
ii	PREFACE.
The fear of being known, has prevented my either reading, or even mentioning, the following sheets to any of my friends, or acquaintance, whofe : fuperior judgments might have dire£l:ed mine, and would, consequently, have rendered this book lefs ., incorre£l. Thus circumstanced, I give it to the ^ world, with all its faults about it, declaring, that I shall not be flattered by their praife, becaufe that can only be due to the Author, nor humiliated by their cenSure, for the fame reafon. As to the part I have had in it, it is much at their Service, to treat as they shall think proper. I know it is eaSier to ridicule, than to commend j a very little understanding Serves for the first, but it requires a great deal of judgment, to do the latter properly. I acknow. ledge myfelf totally unqualified for being an Author ; and the only apology I can make for appearing in print, is, the motive which induced me to it.
The following anecdote is not an invention, but a plain truth, which I shall relate literally as it happened,
A French woman of Some birth, by a strange concatenation of uncommon incidents, found her-felf in distrefs at	; when recolle6iing, that
she bad formerly had feme little acquaintance with me, she enquired if I was in town, and being an-
fwered
I
P R E F A C E.	ill
fwered in theaffirmative, wrote me a note, intreating me to come to her : I did So immediately, and found her in the hands of her mercileSs creditors, who were upon‘the-point of dragging her toprifon. Shocked at the horror of her fituation, I wistied to refcue her from it, but could not afford to give the money, which it was necessary to advance for her relief. She read my thoughts in my eyes, and faid, “ My dear Madam, I have a Manufcript, in French^ which, if it was tranflated, would, I dare fay, produce money enough to pay you, and carry mehome ; Take it, (continued flie ;) it fell into mypoffeffion by chance, and, unfortunately, it is all the fecurity I can give you at prefent.” Her distrefs was irreSistible ; I, therefore, took the book, and paid the money, which purchafed her liberty, and conveyed her to her nativelland.
On my return home, I instantly began to examine the Manufcript, and was agreeably Surprized to find it contained the Memoirs of an Englijh Lady, with whom I had been many years intimately acquainted. Several of the circumstances, related in her ]l&ry, 1 knew to be matters of fact, fince I my Self had Seen a witnefs of them ; the whole of it feems to me, to be wrote with fuch an air of eafe, and candour, as convinces me, that it is really a faithful narration of the principal events of her life, flung upon paper as they occurred.
She
iv	I" R E F A C E.
She is now dead ; and, therefore, the publication of her Memoirs can give her no pain ; and will, I apprehend, be no dilhonour to her posterity. I wi(h they may be favourably received by the Public; and that the world may ever remain ignorant of the name of the Transtator.
, j-
\
t
'LET-
iSri'kxt « >;m Kt :»:x, SfS| |« »x « :<:« M XX ^51
letters
BETWEEN
An English Lady and her
FR lEND.
LETTER I.
To Mademoifelle D ’ A N g. e v i l L E.
R E there words in any language to ^ A ^ exprefs, what‘the heart feels in the ^	moment of Separation from a beloved
friend f If there are, O teach me them, my ^ t ax Adelaide ! for lean find none to deferibe what I felt yesterday, when I tore my-ielf from your arms at Calais, and immediately embarked iox England. I arrived here about an hour ago. I tremble when I think that the fea divides us, and that every step your horfes VoL. I.	B	take,
2	.D R T T E R I.
take, increafes the distance which Separates us from each other. This country (tho’ fertile) appears to me a defert; there is a vacuum in my foul for want of you, which nothing can Supply. I have often heard, that Nature has implanted in the breasts of af! Iier creatures, a love for their native country: It may be So in general, but I am an exception to this ruk; mine has ufed me too ill, and I have Suffered too much in it, ever to look upon it without pain, and (I fear I might add) without Some degree of detestation.
I Set out for London to-morrow, where probably I shall not meet a face I know. A new race is Sprung up Since I left it, and have pushed their parents (who were my acquaintance) off the stage :- No matter, pleafure was not the motive which led me here; it was buSinefs, as you know, which I shall diSpatch as quick as possible, in order to rejoin my dear Adelaide, and to breathe a purer air than that which blows
in this inclement istand. My-------what shall
I fay to the Marquis d'Aife^ your Brother ? Compliments, are too cold, and love, is too much ; fo fay what you will for me. Adieu, my ever-valued friend; my heart is too full to touch upon the pathetic, when you are its ob-je6t, fo till time has rendered me more teafona-ble, I can only be
Yours faithfully,
C \V.
Dover, May —,
■ 17—.
L E 'S-
( 3 )
LETTER ri.
• To Mrs. Williams.
I Rejoice, my dearest friend, to find that you are Safe arrived at Dover. It was kind of you to write the moment you fat your feet on Shore. I followed your vessel with my coporeal eye, till it was out of fight, but in my mental one I fee it yet; full of this image I returned to the inn, and, with a heart overcharged with Sorrow, flung myfelf into a great chair, till the Coach (which I had ordered the Servants to put the horfes to) was ready. Thus I remained for fome time, almost stupified by grief, when I was roufed by a deep groan, which iffued from the other end of the room: My eye instantly followed the found, when I perceived my brother laid all along upon three chairs, and look-^ ing as pale as death ; my every faculty had been So totally abforbed in the thoughts of having lost you, that I had forgot him, till the loud Sigh above-mentioned called my attention, and d was just going to fay. Lord, brother, what is the matter! Are you not well ! when he prevented my enquiries by starting up; faying with an air of impatience, “ Thofe fellows have been already four hours in getting the coach ready ; I wish, for their punifhment, they were only to feel the half of what they infli61, by forcing me to stay fo long in this confounded inn, where perhaps I have Seen the lovely Charlotte for the last time.’' So faying he ran down stairs, and in lefs than five minutes my woman came to inform me, that the coach waited, and '"hat B 2	the
4	LET r E R II.
the Marquis was already In it. I confeSs to yon^ my Dear, that the difcovery I had just made, was of Singular Service to me, as it obliged me to exert my Spirits in order to divert my brother’s melancholy ; beSides, il led me into a new train of thinking; for tho’I always knew the high esteem, veneration, and refpe6l my brother had for you, (in common with all who < have the happinefs of knowing you,) yet till this moment I never fufpefled him of being in love with you : Your penetratiiig eye, Charlotte., (which nothing efcapes) has, no doubt, read his foul long ago ; and he, from a perfect knowledge of youi cbaraSten, which is fo much above the weaknefs of your fex, has not dared to reveal his pastion ; this I take to be the true state of the cafe ; I (hall wait, however, with Some impatience, your anfwer ; and in the mean time I endeavour to comfort him, by talking of your Speedy return.
The coach rolled on, and brought us Safe that night io Dunkirk ; the next morning early we proceeded on our journey, and the third day we arrived at	My aunt, with whom you
know we intend to make a Short stay, received us with an air of tlie most cordial friendship:
She observed, that the Marquis was uncommonly grave ; he attributed it tohis being much fatigued, and made that his excufe for retiring early to his chamber ; the next morning brought me your dear letter ; I anfwered it in the moment ; my brother is now reading it, and with a look exprestIve of love, fear, hope, and inex-prelSible tenderneSs, afks what it is you Send iiim ? Since it is I who am to make the compliment : I anfwered, Your friendship and esteem
I knew
LETTER Iir.	5
Sknew were his; more I could not offer him ; adding, I wilhed I could, and then he might depend on being happy. He Sighed, and thanked me, defiling me to affuie you of his most humble and refpeftful compliments! I Said, Is that all? How can you delight in tormenting me? he replied with vivacity, and immediately flounced out of the room.
I must drefs for dinner, So adieu. In my next I will tell you how I like this town. You are well acquainted both with it, and its principal inhabitants, So perhaps, my opinion of them may afford you fome amufement.
Take care of your precious health, I conjure you, and make haste and return to your difconfolate, but ever affeflionate
D’Angeville.
LETTER III.
Sfo Mademoifelle D’An GEVILLE.
AL L you tell me, my dear Adelaide, of your brother’s behaviour, on my departure from Calaif, rather grieves than Surprizes me; for I cannot deny the having perceived, that his Sentiments for me were of a warmer nature than thofe which generally flow from Ample friendihip, unmixt with love. I fay I thought I perceived it; for his tongue never fpoke in any other language than that of friendship, and all his profeshons of esteem might, with equal propriety, liave been addressed to you as well as to me ; but then his looks and every a6tion Seemed to tell me the Secret of his B 3	heart.
®	L E T T E R Hi.
heart. When I first made this observation, F hoped I was deceived ; I refle<SIed, that neither he, nor I, were any longer of that age when passion holds the reins of reafon, and when judgment is the stave of fenfation ; I flattered my-felf, therefore, that on a farther knowledge of me, the Marquis would find he had made a very injudicious choice, and consequently eafily withdraw his affedions from me.
Dead as l am to every idea of love, judge of my grief to find, from your letter, that I had inspired the brother of my friend with an ardent, but hopeleSs passion. Alas! he little knows the heart which he aSpires to the possession of, or he would never attempt its conquest ; it is no longer worthy of him ; incapable of receiving any tender impression, hardened by uninterrupted disappointment and misfortune, it is now reduced to a state of apathy, from which nothing can recall it; it has felt, till it can feel no more. Try to convince him of this, and guide his choice to a more deServing obje6i, who can repay his love with tenderneSs. Friend-strip, and the highest esteem, are tributes which my reafon cannot reSuSe to his merit ; inexorable Fate has left me nothing more to give. Had I known him Some years ago, I might never Iraveexperienced misfortune; and he would (I believe) have been happy ; but at the preSent period of nry life, an attachrrient with any of his Sex is absolutely impossible for me ever to rhink of. I have now, my dtzr Adelaide, opened my heart to you, and I beg, in conlequence of my Sincerity, that you will never more mention the fubjeft to me. You are not unacquainted with the steadiness of my charader,
and
LET T E R IV.	7
and know how very unapt Iamtochange a'Syi-t«m I have once adopted.
This affair being decided, I stall now inform you, that I arrived, on Tuelday evening, at my lodgings in Suffolk-Jireet \ my body Somewhat fatigued, and my mind depressed by the Sight of numberleSs objefts, which recalled former Scenes to my ideas: In stort, I went to bed in the vapours ; luckily, the agitation of my Spirits, joined to the jumbling of the poss-chaife, had together tired me enough to procure me a good night’s rest. I sseptlate, and as Soon as I got up. Sent for my lawyer, and then wrote cards to the few acquaintance I have in London, for fear lest Ishould looSe the uSe of my tongue for want of Somebody to talk to ; tho’ I fancy I stall make a ridiculous figure when I attempt to Speak my native language ; I stall certainly think in French, and transsate into Englijh, and the latter, you must own, will be much improved, when dressed up in the idiom of the former—No matter, I stall be laughed at, and called affected, that is the worst which can happen to me. I long to hear from you ; my friendship to your brother, compliments to your aunt and tenderest love to yourfelf, my dear Adeiaide
C. W.
P. S. I expeff my brother and fister in town every moment.
LETTER IV.
To Mrs. Williams.
INDEED, my dear Charlotte, I stall not tell my brother one word of what you have Said B 4	in
8	I. E T T E R IV.
in your last concerning him. I perfuade him to-ceafe to love you ! No, indeed, I never attempt impossibilities ; fo Shall leave the poor man his hopes—if he has any—and you may fettle their value when he and you meet. I own, I think you were formed for each other, and I never-will defpair of feeing you united.
I'hate and detest England-., its foggy and glooi-my climate ieems already to have robbed you of that gaiety, which was the charm of Society ; I have often heard you figh, my dear Cbarlotte.^ when any one has mentioned your native country ; and by Several hints, which you have given on the Subjefl, I could learn, that you had been unhappy in the married state. You may remember that one day, on my pressing you, with ardor, to tell me the story of your life, you anfwered me with a Sigh, Alas, Adelaide, “ what do you afk of me ? I Ihould pierce ** your tender heart with the narration of my Sorrows, and open in my own, wounds, which ** I have, for years, been courting the hand of ** Philofophy to heal; and which, tho’ nolong-“ er acutely painful, yet, I fear will again bleed “ upon being probed. No, my Dear, I cannot “ comply with your request now ; but if ever I “ go XoEnglandagain I will therecolleisi Some pa-“ pers, which form a kind of journal of the tranf-“ actions of the prior part of my life ; and what ** has happened to me Since I came to France, I “ have put down in my common-place-book, lo “ when I have pieced the two parts together, I “ promife to Satisfy your curioSity ; and the “ more readily, as I Shall not be preSent whilst you read it.”
And
L E T T E R IV.	,
And now, my Dear, I claim your promiSe ; I do not mean immediately, but at your leifure; it must, however, you know, be before you leave England ; and, in order to Set you a good example, I am going to fulfil mine, by giving you my opinion of the place and its inhabitants where I now am. Yesterday I verily believe the whole town of *** was at rliy aunt’s. What a Sett of fat Flemifh figures ! They have not yet flung off.the manners of their former maf-ters, the Spaniards^ but, like them, are stiff, formal, proud, and Superstitious to an excefs, and as aukward as their neighbours the Dutch. I found Some genteel people, however, in the town, but they were mostly strangers. Good God, what voracious appetites tliefe Flemings have ! The polite hour of dining is one o’clock and they Seldom rife from table till between four and five in the afternoon ; they eat a great deal;, and as stow as they do every thing elfe ; one has Sufficient time to digest the first courfe, before the Second is brought up to table. They drinkin proportion to what they eat, and I really believe from hence Springs a great deal of that hluninefsof faculty, fo remarkable in thefe people. They are, in general, but one remove from the vegetable world, and are distinguished as animal, by a stow motion, and now and then a word or two, v.^hich by no means amounts to a proof of their being rational. There are, how’ever, many who ought to be feleded from the herd, and they, I found, upon converfing with them, were your friends, amongst whom w'as Madarh K—, a SenSible, w'ell-bred, worthy woman, who, in Spite of ill health, , and an oIHiuSb.and, renders her houfe delightful, by B 5,	her
10	L E T T E R IV. ''
her good humour, polite addreSs, and elegant choice of her company. When I first Saw her I took her to be an exotic, but for the honor of Flanders, fhe was bred and born in it.
I here fee a race of beings I never was acquainted with before, I mean a number of fub-altern French O^ctxs, who are admitted into the houfesof the Governor, Commandant, Cfc. as beng of the garrifon, a favor, you know,, which never is allowed them in FariS‘, unlefs they are of a very distinguifhed birth. I have often heard it obferved, that a French Officer of forty, is,, in genera!, what may be called good company ; and that, when Some years younger, they are the worst in the world. I fee the force of this obfervalion now, tho’ I never understood it before. I do not know amongst what fpecies of beings thefe animals on tw’o legs rank themfelves they are ignorant, vain, affe<3:ed, and noify beyond all conception ; in Short, the piUures fo frequently drawn by your countrymen of ours, have ever, till my arrival here, appeared to me boiii falfe and injurious to the nation ; but now I frankly own, the lines are not too strong, nor are the paintings caiicatura’s. You know them, fo I fear i have already tired you with my defcription of them ; but remember, Charlotte, that if one was forbid writing on any fubje6ts but fuch as you were a stranger to, pen and ink would be ©f no farther ufe to me ; and you, in all probability, would not have a correfpondent left, or at least very few, amongst whom I most alTur-edly should not be one.
How vast are the advantages you have over me, for the contrary reafon, and hew inexbauf-
table
^ / /
L E T T E R IV.	II
table is the fund of knowledge you poffefs, which has, during a conne6l:ion of Seven years, been my constant study ; and yet I amconfcious that at this period I have not been able to fathom one quarter of its depth. You was a book to me, in which I read every day, and all the day, with equal delight, becaufe you was always new. This reflexion makes me feel your ah-fence lb Severely, that I must, with a tear, drop my pen, after liaviftg begged you to return, as ibon as possible, to your ever faithful, and affedionate
D’Angeville.
My Brother fends his best refpccls ; I am very uneafy about him : lie looks ill, and has lost (in a great degree) both his Spirits and appetite.
L E T T E R V.	^
To Mademoifelle D’Angeville.
I Really believe, my dear Jdelaide, that Flanders appears to you lefs like France^ than London does to me ; the reafon is, that there are more French here, than where you are. The streets, all public places as well as private houfes, are full of them ; French is almost the only language fpoke in polite company, becaufe of the number of people of distin6lion of that nation, who frequent the afSemblies of the Great. I met the other night, at Lady H—’s, the young Count of A—. I could not help Smiling at the strong refemblance he bears ®f his real father. You know him, but, I believe.
12	LETTER V.
lieve, are not acquairted with the history of his birth, which, in as few words as I can put it, is as follows; The prefent Duke deB—, when a young man, (youmay probably have heard) was not rich, and could form no hopes of ever rifing to that prodigious height of favor, and power, wliichhennw enjoys: He was then called the Count de S-—, and was at that time (if I remember) a Mufqueteer. He was ac-quainted with an old gentleman of large foi tune,, who had two daughters only, and no ion ; the eldest was married to the fuppofed fatlier of the Count de A—, and the other (being much younger than her Sister) was in a Convent You knowhow infinitely entertaining the Duke can be, when he pleafes ; the houfc ot this old'gentleman, where he dined very frequently, was convenientto him, who was far from postesting. a fortune equal to his birth ; he therefote courted the old man, and, by the fprightlinels of his converfation, rendered himfelt lo agreeable to him, that he grew as fond of him as if he had been hisownSon.
One day, when the Count and he were alone, . the old gentleman, after a Silence of Some moments, laid, with a Sigh, “ How happy is your lather to have Such a Son as you are! and what An afdidfion is it to me, thatmy daughter has no child. I hoped for a grandfon, to whom I might have left my large estate; with this intention I ' * made my eldest daughter an heirefs; and referv-ed for the youngest a genteel competency only : but all my Schemes are difappointed, from a certainty, that stie can never have any children by her prefent hufband ; and he may probably live thefe forty or fifty years. Ah, Count f I wilh
I had
LETTER V.	13
I had known you Some time Sooner than I did !. you might then have been my Son-in-law ; however, continued he, you may still be. the father of my grandSon, if you and stie can agree upon it; and I fancy you won’t find her very averfe to the proposition, as I think I have obferved, that the has already more than a common regard for you. Thus you fee, my dear C<. unt, you have it in your power to make me happy, by giving me an heir. It is true, her fortune returns to her fister, in cafe of failure of issue in her ; but then (he is So young; that I Shall probably never live to fee her married.” The Count’s anSwer may eaSily be guessed, as we muss; fuppoSe that he had too much gratitude to his friend and benefactor, to refufe him a favor of this kind ; befides, what puts the question out of all difpute, is, that fhe was both young and handfome. A few months after this convcrfati-on the lady proved with child, and, at the ufual time, brought into the world the prefent Count de A—, who is, (as Shave Said before.) the image of his father. Not long after this period the .hufband of the lady died; the then Count S—, now Duke	—, continued his intimacy
in the family : VShen, Some years after the event Shave related above, the youngest daughter of his triend came home from the Convent, the _Duke, who bad till that moment never Seen her, was wounded at first fight; in Ihort he fell def-peratcly in love; you know her, and therefore will not be Surprized that he should pay that homage to her charms at fifteen, which a much greater man than he has done, when she was no longer in the bloom of youth ; in short, he mariied her, and by So doing reverfed the order
of
14	L E T T E R V.
of things, by dissnheriting his ligitim.'ite children, in favor of his bastard ; for had not the eldest fister had a Son, his children by the younger must have heired all their grandfather’s fortune. This anecdote may justly be thought too long for a letter, but as you are well acquainted with all the adors in the piece, I hoped it might amufe you; it is a curious one; I had it from an old and intimate friend of the family, and tho’ it is a real truth, yet it would appear fabulous in my country. A father, who procures a gallant for his daughter, would be here looked upon as a monster, and probably be as difficult to find (at least in high life) as \\\^Ph<s~ nix. We are near neighbours, my Dear; but in fome things our manners differ as much as if w^ inhabited the two Poles. It is certain we are of stricter morals than )'o\x French ; what I have frequently heard mentioned in Paris as an affair of gallantry only, would have been looked uport as an atrocious crime, by us flegmatic Istanders.
I remember a circumstance, which happened to me once at Pariff that will do to justify the truth of my affertion.
I was one day at Lady	when, amongst
a great deal of good company (with which her houfe was always crouded) there was a lively, pretty-looking young man, whom 1 afterwards found out to be the Marquis de P—, fo famous for his fuccefs amongst the Ladies, and particularly v/ith a great Princefs; the conversation turned upon the force and duration of an attachment formed in extreme youth, in preference to thofe contraQed in riper years: The Marquis, with a vivacity which is peculiar to him, feid, that the first intrigue he had ever had, was
witk
L E T T E R V.	15
with his own mother ; that he came from College very young, and ufed frequently to sit by her bed-side, in Ihort, he thought her the hand-fomest woman he had ever feen ; and She (who was probably worn out with vice) lound the charms of novelty in his youth and innocence. He did not tell this story So decently as I do. How lhall I defcribe to you, my friend, the horror and amazement which Seized my fenfes at this astonishing recital ? I felt my face burn with stiame and indignation ; when recovering a little from my confusion, I perceived that the story had affected nobody but myfelf; the company Seemed to be no ways moved at it j only Lady S— faid, ** Fye, Marquis, let me counfel you never to tell that anecdote of yourfelf and mother again ; it ought to be buried in oblivion.” But I perceive that, without intending it, ram infensibly writing a Satire upon a nation, which I both love and honor ; however, give me leave to think, that your people in high life have relaxed their moral System rather too much. I cannot, indeed, with justice, make an eulo-gium on the manners of our great folks; yet it must be allowed, that, however irregular their conduct in private may be, at least they wear an exterior of decency,, and have (Sometimes) modesty enough to conceal, what they have not always virtue to refrain from the practice of: Whether hypocrify, in this cafe, be a virtue or a vice, I leave to your Sorbonne to determine.
I admire the defcription you give me of your *** acquaintance ; they are what are called, mighty good fort of people, and like most of thofe, whom the ill-judging part of the world honor with that epithet, very unentertaining ;
they
i6	LETTER VI.
they Seem to me, to be of that Species of beings, to whom Providence has given fouls by way of fait, to keep them from stinking ; the thought is (if I remember, C/Vfro’s, and can never be better applied, than on this occaston. lam Sorry to find, Adelaide, that you remember the promife I So unguardedly made you, of (hewing you the journal of my life, for it would be doing it too much honor to call it a history ; how'-ever, I will not recede from my word, but w'ill indubitably fend it you, by the first Safe conveyance that offers, it being too large a packet to go by the post. I am afhamed of the length of this letter ; it is the confequence of having nothing to do. My Sister’s children were taken illof the fmall-pox, thedayshewas to have Set out ior London, , {o l am left to finiih my bufi-nefs here, which, when done, I Shall go down to their leat in the country. Adieu, dear friend,, continue to love me, and write Soon to your faithful	C. W.
l am very forry to hear of your Brother’s in-difpoSition ; my best compliments to him, and fay, I have not forgot the commiffion he favoured me with.
LETTER VI.
To Mrs. Williams.
My Charlotte,
IF I did not know you to be a Cofmopolite,
I Should fufpe6l your having imbibed fome of the prejudices of your countrymen, who are
Said
L E T TER VI.	17
Said to hold all nations In contempt but their own, and particularly us their neighbours: 'I’he two instances you, my Dear, have given, to prove the immorality of iht French, are strong; but I hope you will allow them to be very uncommon. The story of the Count —I am much obliged to you for r I have heard Some part of it before, but never understood it dearly till now ; it is a curious anecdote to ihofe who know the parties. As to the Marquis of P—, neither he, or any other man, could ever have been drawn into the commission of fohorrid a crime, as that which he had the audacity to mention at Lady S—"s, by the means of any other woman; than the Marchionefs his mother who was (as you must have heard) the Mejfalina of her time.- We may, therefore, with confidence hope, that there is not Such another instance to be found either in ours, or any other Christian country ; and if there were no apparent marks of Surprize in the faces of thoSe who were prefent at fo horrid a recital, it must have been, becaufe they, being Pariftenes, had frequently heard the circumstance, which is known to the whole world, at least in France; and he too, might mention it with that feeming eafe, as fuppoSing every body prefent to be acquainted with it. I have’myfelf heard it above a hundred times, but never told without horror and detestation by the narrator. The world is, perhaps, not fo very bad as it stems to be the prevailing faSnion to think it ; Virtue and Vice are blended in most chara<Sters. I am of your famous Pope*i opinion, when he fays.
Virtuous
i8	LETTER VI.
Virtuous and vicious every man must be.
Few in the extreme, but all in the degree,
The rogue and fool, by turns is fair and wife,
And even the best, by fits, what they defpife.
I am otrliged tor the tranllation to our Abbe du Refnal. Yet where vice preponderates in the Scale, I think we may pronounce the character a bad one, and, as being Such, it fhould be shunned by all thofe who profeSs themfelves her enemy.
Was this maxim put rigidly in pradlice, without favouring the perfons of the Great, Vice would Soon be out of countenance, and her votaries condemned to live in Solitude, a Situation which Virtue alone can render agreeable, and consequently must be infupportable to Vice ; • oblige a libertine to live, for one week only, by himfelf and I am perfuaded he will, , from con-vi61ion, confefs, that he is the worst of company. It is a strange thing that mankind, who in general are partial to their own opinion in all other cafes,.should in this prefer the approbation of the world to their own, by a6ting in a man-ner-they know to be wrong, and then taking all the pains imaginable to conceal their bad con-du6l from their acquaintance ; not conSidering how injuriousty they are treating themfelves, whilst they are trying to deceive others; 'I hus it frequently happens, that they who have done premeditated ill a6bons v/ithout remorfe, have died of the wound given to their vanity, by the just contempt they have met with from the world on being diicovered ; this could never happen if we Set a proper value on our approbation of our-felves. I am led to this reflexion from being, a Sew days ago, in company with Mrs. D—, a
fenSible
LETTER VI.	19
lenSible Irifo woman, who ran away from the tenderest of parents, to follow, what you always term, an Irifo rebel, or one of that nation in the King of France^ Service ; one fault is Seldom unaccompanied by others, consequently the next step was to renounce the religion of her fathers, and become a Roman Catholic, under the title of a new convert, which you know there is a foundation for at Paris, and by proper application the King’s penSion may be obtained. She applied for it, and Succeeded, So that she gained the end for which (I prefume) she for-fook her faith ; and is now, in conSequence of not liking her hushand (who is poor, being reduced to half-pay,) and the disapprobation of her own condud, dying by inches, and at pre-fent a walking SpeCtre ; her hushand is illiterate and a bigot ; they are generally Synonimous. He is what I have heard you call, a red hot Papist, and would (I fuppoSe) burn you Protel-tants without the least remorfe, for the love of God and the Holy InquiSition. Such is the irrefistable force of Superstition, which eradicates from the breast every benevolent principle of humanity, and, like a forcerefs, having enchanted the optics of reaSon, converts cruelty, and every monstrous phantom of a distempered brain, into the inviting forms of the most Sacred duty. Such as I have painted him she Sees him, and feeling that she is libelled by her choice, cannot Survive the thought. How might she have Spared her heart all the pangs it now Suffers, by following the laws of God and Nature, in honouring and obeying her parents! Let the ties of blood alone, it is an ungenerous and an inhuman a6t to wound the hearts of thoSe,
whofe
ao’	LETTER HI.
whoSe tender care has raifed our infanc}’’, and* whole friendly hand is ever ready to Support and diredt our riper years. But I find I am imperceptibly writing a Sermon; excule me, my dear Gbarlotte^ in favour of the candour v/ith winch I have Spoke on the Subjedl of the. religion I' proSefs, and which, divested of bigotry and Superstition, i reverence and honor ; Since it does not forbid me to love and admire virtue, though I-should find her in IexVyFurk, or Gentile. Adieu, my dear Charlotte, your abfcnce isareaL misfortune to me, and flings a gloom overall my ideas; return, then, and restore to gaity and comfort the heart of your ever aflFe6I;ionate
D’Angeville.*
P. S. My Brother has forgot what commiS-Sion he gave you, but it is no wonder 5.. poor man, he appears to me not to have a quarter of a fenfe left. I wish you would fend him a Small parcel of them back, as I: am convinced that they are all in your poS-feshon. We let out for Paris next week.
LETTER VII.
P‘0 Mademoifelle D’An gevi lle.
My dear Adelaide,
YOU are quite a moral PhiloSopher; I had* half a mind to have put your letter into one of our Literary Journals, for the good of the public. Nothing can be more judicious than are your remarks on the charader of Mrs.
K--.
LETTER VII.	21
tK—; and when yon have read my Memoirs, y’ou will fee how fenfibly I must feel the truths you have wrote ; but, my dear friend, hitherto my failings have been hid from you ; you knew me only when the iron hand of affli6tion had,* taught me to regulate my condu6t by reafon’s rules, or rather, perhaps, when misfortune had, in a great meafure annihilated my paSfions; for we are apt to charge Nature with a I our faults, but make our virtues pafs for the este61; of our reafon and choice ; and both unjustly. However this may be, you might have remained for ever ignorant of the weaknesses of your friend, had not your curioSity, and my rafli promife, obliged me to lay my bofom bare before you, by narrating the principal events of my life. I have applied myfelf assiduousty to that esseSl for Some time, but I meet with lo many.interrup-tions in the work, that I fgaC'if; will be very de-feStive and incorre61 ; howre^r, the fa6ls are there, though loofely and negligently thrown together; it is fit only for the perufal of a friend; and no one elfe, I trust, will ever fee it. Since I have your word of honor that it Shall never be stiewn but to the Marquis your brother. Indeed, you accufe me unjustly, Adelhide ; 1 have none of that Gentleman’s fenfes : How can you be fo childifh as to talk in that manner ? 1 could almost quarrel with you for trifling on So Serious a fubje<si as that of a hopelefs pastion : If, indeed, the Marquis has conceived Such a one for me, as you would make me believe, he is infinitely to be pitied ; and fo am I, by being the involuntary caufe of inquietude to a man tor -whom I have the highest esteem, and, it 1 may
be
22	LETTER VII.
be allowed the expression, the tenderest friend-Ihip ; but no more on this fubjedi, I beg.—
I must now tell you that I have gained my caufe, and am peaceably put into polSession of the estate my uncle left me, without even having my lawyer’s bill to pay, Since the plaintiff is cast with costs of fuit. So having now nothing to do in town, I Shall Set out, in a few days, for Sir Charkds feat in the country, as I long to fee both him and his Lady. My eldest brother has been in town with me for Some time; my father is confined in the country with the gout, fo cannot be moved. I have Seen the worthy Mr. Smith; but you know nothing of him yet; when you do, I expedt you to be in love with him ; he and I were very near dying with joy at the fight of each other; his age could not bear Such a torrent of tendernefs and pleafure, as the fight of me raifed in him ; on my part, the lively fenfibilityl had of his more than parental goodnefs to me, my love and veneration of his charadier, joined to the warm gratitude, with which my heart glowed, on the remembrance of all the benefits I had received from him, overcame me, and, on approaching him, I fainted away in his arms; his years, and tendernefs for me, rendered him incapable of Supporting me, fo that had not a Servant been pre-fent, I do not know what would have become of either of us. When I recovered, I condemned my indiscretion and want of fortitude, in thus giving way to fenfation ; but I was unguarded against pleafure, from being unufed to experience its effedls. I begged my friend and benefa6Ior to pardon the vivacity of my joy on feeing him again ; he had been much alarmed
during
LETTER VIII.	23
during the Scene ; however, I stayed the whole day with him, and had the Satisfadlion of leaving him pretty well compofed at night.—You
•will fay, why, what is Mr. Smith to me ?--
T anfwer, a great deal, when you have read my story, which I fhalstfend you Shortly. Pray, my Dear, try to forget jt before 1 return to France.—My friendship to the Marquis; I fear he is ill, by not having heard from you lately. Aditu, diSpel my apprehenSions by a line to your faithful	C W *
LETTER VIII.
To Mrs. W ILLIAMS.
You will no longer be Surprized at my Silence, when I inform-you, that my brother has been, for Sometime, in an ill state of health ; indeed he has never been well Since we parted with you, my dear Charlotte^ at Calais. I perceived, with ixexprestible concern, that he nourished in his breast a paSTion for you, which destroyed his constitution. I propoSed going into the country, to See what change of •air would do ; but perceiving him grow weaker and paler every day, I.juciged it necessary to bring him back to Parts. His Physician told me, that the Marquis’s diSorder was out of the reach of medicine, as he apprehended it to proceed from an affe£bon of the mind, not a diS-eaSe of the body, though the latter was always
* It appears as if fome letters had been loft between this of Mrs. Williams's^ and the following one from Mademoifelle D'AngeFtlle.
the
24	LETTER VIII.
the confequence of the former ; he added, that if I knew the caufe of my Brother’s melancholy, I ought to endeavour, by reafon and argument, to lessen its force, and to convince him of its pernicious confequences, as well as of its inutility. This difcourfe made me think that Sought to probe the wound ; and that, perhaps., when he was thoroughly convinced of the impossibility of attaining his deSires, he might exert himfelf, and in time get the better of a f-hopelefs passion ; with this thought, after having one day talked much of you, and the ssn-gular turn of your character, I ventured to af-fert, that you was no longer fufceptible of the tender passions; and, in order to fupport my opinion, I drew out of my pocket the first letter you wrote me after your arrival in England.
o\\^ Cbarloited how stialll be able to describe to you the Sequel of this dreadful Scene.? Into what an abyfs of mySery has my indiscretion plunged me ! He heard the letter read with great attention, when, looking at me with all the marks of ineffable grief painted in his face, he Said, “ 1 thank you. Sister, for deciding my fate; Hope is now no more; I fhall die content, since the stroke is given by the too amiable Charlotte.” He turned pale on pronouncing thefe words, and fell back in his chair ; I flew to his assistance, and found his head and hands burning hot: We put him to bed immediately j his fever increafed; the Physicians Seem to think him in danger ; he obstinately refufes to take any of the medicines prefcribed by his Doflors.
1 read him to day, a paragraph in your last letter, where you fay, ** That you are Sorry to have been the innocent caufe of inquietude to a
man.
L E T T E R IX.	25
man, for whom you have the highest esteem and add, (“ If I may be permitted the expression) the tenderest friendship.”
He raiSed his languid head, and looking at me faid, I am infinitely honoured by her friend-siiip ; but my heart afpires at mpre ; nor can I live, unlefsby a miracle I could infpire her with a tenderer Sentiment for me than that of esteem ; but, alas, (added he) that can never .be;” and So Saying, with a deep sigh. Sunk down again upon his pillow. Write to him, my dear Char-iotte ; on my knees I beg you to Save his life ; mine depends on his recovery; Soften your stile, my dear ; and if you cannot love at least do not tell him So. Cominand him to love he will exert his utmost power to obey you, by taking proper remedies; in stiort, restore my brother to the affli6Ied heait of
Your faithful, but almost distraSled D’Angeville.
LETTER IX.
Fo Mademoifella D’Angeville,
Ah, Adelaide, vy'hat a talk have you impoSed upon me ! and how have you wounded my heart, by the account you give me of the Marquis’s preSent Situation ! Grief,Pity, Friendship, all combine to make me wretched! I would Sacrifice my life, with pleaSure, to restore him again to health and peace; but Love, is it in our power? Or, if it were, could I,t ought I, ever again to admit it into my breast? VoL. I.	C	I here
2 6	L E T T E R X.
I here IncloSe a letter toyoiir Brother, in com* pliance with your request ; I wifh it may contribute to his recovery ; I have Sard, all that friendihip can expect from me in it, and more perhaps, than prudence will approve ; I have expofed my heart to his view, without the least reServe : Let him read it, and if he can there find any ground for hope, I fhall be glad of it,
I most stncerely wifh him both peace and hap-pinefs; but cannot give them to him at the expence of my veracity. Adieu, Adelaide^ my Ipirits are depress, I fhall not know a moment’s eafe till I hear from you again.
Yours, as ever, C. W.
My Brother and Sister are much yours. I Sent the promised Memoirs, by one of the King’s MelTengers, before I left town; I fuppofe our ambassador has Sent it you before now. I have employed a man ever ssnce you requessed to fee them, and I think he has been very expeditious in transcribing them ; it is true, he has worked every day, and all the day, at them.
LETTER X.
To the Marquis D ^ A i s e.
Dear Sir,
IT is impossible forme to defcrlbe the uneast-nefs which a letter I received yesserday, from Mademoifclle DAngevilky has given me. Toknowyouaredangeroullyill, and to be told that 1 am the unhappy caufe of your indifpoSition, is
not
L E T T E R X.	27
not lefs Surprizing than painful to me: If in reality you have that affe<^ion for me, which your Sister assures me of, you will fpare my heart the wound of having deprived my dearest friend of a beloved Brother. Be certain, that, fhould this be the cafe, peace muSt for ever be a stranger to my breast. You must live. Sir, or my future existence will be imbittered by the sight of that very Sister, who has.for So many years, been the delight and comfort of it. How will (he ever bare to look upon the wretch who robbed her of you ? Alas, the thought chills my blood with horror! Is this a return to make her for her constant and tender attachment to me ? And could stie, from an effort of generous pity, forgive my involuntary crime ; yet what would confole me for the lofs of a friend, I fo highly esteemed and valued as yourfelfI therefore beg of you, dear Sir, for my fake, to ufe all possible methods for your recovery ; remember, my peace depends on your compliance with this request. I have Sent your Sister the Story of my Life ; I beg fhe v/ould read it to you ; and when you have heard it, if you (hould think it poffible for my heart to be again fufeep- ' tible of a tenderer fentiment than that of friendship, ufe your endeavours to infpire me with it. You have already my Sincerest regard, and Sensibility of your worth ; but my heart is, I fear, dead to love ; obtain that, and I promife you the hand of your ever faithful and affedlionate friend	C. W.
c 2	P. s.
28	L E T T E R X.
P. S. I shall not be long before I return to Paris ; I therefore infill: that you do not anfwcr this, and I expedt to be obeyed.*
* I thought proper to incert the Memoirs here, as the reft «f the Letters were apparently wrote after Mademoifella D'An-^ levillt had read them, and to which they frequently allude.
«
THE
(	29	)
THE
MEMOIRS
o F
Mrs. williams*.
My father was a Gentleman of an ancient family in the West of England^ and one of the Reprefentatives in Parliament for the county in which he lived. He had an estate of three thoufand pounds a year. He married the daughter of a neighbouring Gentleman, who had more beauty than fortune, and more birth than either ot them, her father having the right to a Peerage, but could never be prevailed upon to take up the title, becauie the estate, which belonged to it, had been left from him,
I was the first fruit of their union, about nine months after their marriage. Never, Sure, were two people of more different characters united, than my father and mother were: He was, in theory, a philofppher, loved reading, had a liberal education, was born with strong natural fenfe, lome wit, and violent pallions; his understanding, which was remarkably fine, he had cultivated by travelling, and a most ex-tenfive knowledge of books; he read mankind with two critical an eye, which naturally led him to distike them; the confequence of which
* I have changed the real names into fictitious ones, in order to avoid giving ofFence.
C 3	was.
30 The MEMOIRS of
was, that he was fatyrical and morofe : Whether this turn of mind in reality proceeded from the reafon I have juft given, or was occaSioned by Some disappointments he had met with in his youth, I know not ; or. whether it might not, as I have fometimes fufpeOed, have proceeded from his being connected with my mother, who was, in every reSpedf, the least calculated of any woman living to make him happy. She was gay, giddy, illiterate, good-natured, and vain fo an exceSs; (he had just that (hare of understanding, which Nature Seems to have difpofed of, in equal, but Small parcels, amongst my Sex ; (he preSided with grace at her table, dressed well, (I mean, in that happy medium which is just in the fafhion, without ever approaching the extremes,) in ssiort, like what She was—a Gentlewoman. She could keep up a conversation, for a day together, with life and Spirit, without Saying any thing ; and was, w'hat the world calls, a very agreeable woman ; but w'hat my father thought a very trifling one. She was, however, a good breeder, for in the courfe of Seven years ssie had brought my father as many children. The education of the boys v/as eafi-ly decided, as it was left entirely to my father’s dirctstion ; but that of the girls (of which we were two) occaSioned violent debates between our parents. My father alSerted, that women were rendered fooiiSh and ridiculous by their education, and that, if their minds were properly cultivated, they might be made rational beings as well as the men. My mother, on tiie contrary, infilled, that they were, without liii. -cation, more rational than their masters j ud that learning (as Ihe termed it) only Servtii to
render
Mrs. williams.	31
render a girl ridiculous in the eyes of her own fex, and contemptible in thofe of the men. She affirmed, that a girl ought to Sacrifice to the Graces rather than to Minerva: In Short, this difpute ended, as most difputes do, in both parties being confirmed in the rectitude of their proper opinion. However, as I was now near fcven years old, it was necessary to decide the affair. So they compounded matters, and it was agreed between them, that my father ffiould bring me up according to his own plan ; and that She Should have the entire dirediion and difpo-fal of my Sister Sophia, who was one year younger than myfess. From this moment I became the favourite of my father, and the averfion of my mother. I had already Shewed a taste for reading, though fo young, by purchafing little story books, with all the money I could Scrape together. This circumstance having been observed by my father, might probably have determined his choice between my Sister and me. Be that as it may, I was now become his pupil, and was ordered to attend him, in his library, every morning after breakfast, where he heard me read, and chole my books; he taught me the elements of Geography, and made me read History, with the Globes before me; always making me point out upon them, the part of the world I was then reading about ; In Short, I took as much pleafure in learning, as he did in teaching me. Thus, in a Short time, by continually studying the modes of government of different nations, their climates, Situations, manners, &c. I infenSibly became a little politician, and read the news-papers with more pleafure, and, I may venture to fay, with more intelli-C 4	gence.
I
32 TheMEMOIRSof gence, thnn most of my fex do at a much riper age. He did not confine my studies to Reading and the Globes alone; I had piasters to teach tne Frenchy Writing, Arithmetic, Drawing, and Dancing; Miific, he Said, w'as Such an en-chantreSs, that if 1 had a taste for it, I fhould dedicate too much of my time to it, and ifl had none, I stmukl never make any proficiency in the art ; and that it would always be in my pow- ^ er, in a Shcrt time, to learn to fing a ballad, and thrum the guitarre, after I had learned what he thought much more effential, and which he called the Science of thinking and acting with judgment and propriety.
Young as 1 was, 1 Soon found the utility of his lefions on thele two important fubjefts. The part I fnd to play, in my little Sphere, was by no means an eafy one ; for I could not avoid perceiving, that as I rofe in the esteem of my 1 father, I fell in that of my mother, whofe dif- [ like of me had now almost increafed into an averfion. I remember that, one day, on my , entering the room where Sophia and the were I fitting together, stie faid to me, “ So, Madam i how comes it that your wifdom condefeends to hold convufe with mine, and your Sisters ignorance ? I fuppofe you mean to criticife every .Word we fpeak, by way of amufing yourfeli at ‘ cur expence ; but we will not give you that | pleafure, for we will go out, and leave you to	|
your learned reveries.” So faying, fhe rofe	j
from her chair. I astured her, with great hu- 1 mility, that her company was ever both instructive and pleafing to me, and begged her, almost with teais, not to deprive meet it then. But fhe gave me a look full of anger and contempt, j
and
M R s. w I L L I A M S.	33
and flounced out of the room. Sophia followed her, bet aufe file durst not do otherwise. In this manner stie generally treated me, w'hen-ever r prefented mySelf before her, my father not being with me ; So that, at last, I avoided her almost as much as Ihe did me : And thofe hours wijich were not Spent with my father, I pafsM in my own room by myfelf, or with my masters. At dinner, however, we always met, when it past with great refpetl on my fide, and a cold civility on her’s. Sophia was a good-na* tured girl, and ufed frequently, when (he came into my room, to beg ot me, with tears in her eyes, not to impute to hermy mother’s ill treatment of me; She professed, in the warmest terms, her love and value for me, and begged the continuation ol my friendship for her ; v/hich I readily promifed, as ssie was no way anfwerable for the caprices of my mother. I faw, however, with infinite concern, that I was a theme of perpetual contention between my parents ; and one day, being alone with my father, I intreated him, with the utmost energy, to ceafe Shewing any partiality to me ? I requested him to give me my lesions privately, and that I would study them in my own room by myfelf; I begged of him, not to require my prefence fo frequently in his library, as 1 perceived that my depriving my mother of fo much of his company, was difpleafing to her, and drew upon me her refentment. Heanfwer-ed me, with Some warmth, “ That he was maf-terof own time, and (hould difpofe of it as he pleafed j and that he Should not alter, nor Suffer me to change, either the manner or nature of my studies, on any confideration whatSoe-C 5	ver.”
34 Theme MOIRSof	i
ver.” Thus I was condemned to Suffer what I could not avoid ; however, the affli6lion I felt on being the caufe (though an innocent one) of the daily distentions, and increafe of coolnefs between my parents, wrought at last upon my i constitution, and I became thin, pale, and Ian- 1 guid ; and, instead of that stow of Spirits which was natural to me, I grew penstve, inadlive, and melancholy. My father was the first who perceived the declining state of my health, and alked me, one day, with great tenderneSs, What was my complaint ? and whether I was really ill or no ? I anSwered him, thatiwas certainly far from being well, but that I did not know what was the matter with me. He replied, with vivacity, “ But I do 1 it is your mother’s ill treatment of you that breaks your , heart ; the would be glad of it, but I stxall take ' care to prevent her having that Satisfaction, by removing you out of the reach of her malice.’^
So Saying, he left me. I judged, from his words, that I was destined to leave home Soon, tor Some time, and I was not Sorry for it. That day, at dinner, my father looking at me with an air of more familiar good humiour than ufual, laid, “ Charlotte, my Dear, Should you like to f(ic LendoriF’ I anSwered, Yes, Sir; there are many things in it which I often wifhed to fee, and if you was to go with me, I think I Should be delighted with Such a journey, “ I don’tan-Iwer lor that, replied he, but I promiSe you that you Shall go there, if it is agreeable to you i will write to-morrow to my Sister, to inform her of my intention, of letting you paSs the winter with her ; She has often aSked you of i me, but, till now, I thought you loo young:	|
Indeed, i
Mrs. \V I L L T A A! S.	,,5	|
Indeed, added he, (Smiling) you are not very old now ; but if your years may be counted by your knowledge, you ought no longer to be looked upon as a child.” 1 bowed, and blufhed at this praife; the first I had ever heard from iny father’s mouth ; and, indeed, I believe it was meant more to pique my mother than to flatter me, and I was Sorry for the motive. She made no reply ; but I Saw in her countenance, that fhe was not pleafed with my father’s intention of Sending me to my aunt’s. 1 did not penetrate her reafon’s at that time ; but 1 loon found, that fhe was jealous of the improvements I might make in London^ by having better masters than could be procured in the country, as well as from being introduced intoalar-' ' ger circle of genteel company than 1 had hitherto been : 'TheSe were advantages which she wished for Sophia, but not for me ; or rather the latter, which she held a necessary part of a young lady’s education ; and indeed, in her opinon, was the most estential part of it, as it, she laid, gave eafe and grace, a knowledge cf fashions, and a kind of fmall-talk, which, all together, contribted to form the fine lady: She had therefore laid the plan of fending Sophia to my aunt’s, and was consequently vastly mortified to find, that I had fuperSeded her. I must here remark, that my father (for what reafons I know not) had constantly gone to London every winter, during the Sessions of Parliament, alone, and could never be prevailed upon to let my mother accompany him thither; However,
I have frequently heard him fay, when pressed upo.n the Subject, that when his children were grown up, he would take a houSe in town, but not till then.	About
TheMEMOIRSof
About a month after my father haA declared his intention of fending me from home, I was ' ordered to pack up my deaths, and informed, that I was to Set out the next day, with my fa- ^ ther, tor my aunt’s country feat, which was | about thirty miles distance from our houfe. I | took an affediondte leave of my dear Sophia, who Ihed floods of unfeigned tears on parting with me; when embracing me with the utmost tendernefs, (he Said, She was afliamed of her want of generostty, in thus preferring her own happinefs to mine.
During our journey my father endeavoured to give me Some idea of the charadlers I was going to live with. He told me, with a fmile, “ That his Sister was a great fool, and consequently thought herSeif extremely wife ; for (added he,) it belongs only to the happy few, who are really fo, to doubt of their own capacities. She was an old maid when fhe married, au epithet ■which fhe had (in common with the rest of her •Sex) an averston to : In order, therefore, to get rid of it, stie married the first man w'ho afleed her the question ; your prelent uncle was the perfon ; fo, without holding it the least neceffa-ry to enquire into his charadter, difpofition, Sec.
^e only informed herfelf of his income ; and that being found Sufficient to keep her in the rank of life in w hich the had always lived, they were married. The joy the felt, on having rubbed off the odium which is fo generally ‘(though, I think, very unjustly} flung upon old maids, made her not attend, at least (or Some days, to the character of her huffiand, which, however, Ihe was obliged to do in the courfe of Some weeks. He is one ol thole men, who,
not
Mrs. W I T. L I a M S.	37
not being able to make themSelves of any con-fequence abroad, ate Czars in their own houfes. His tyranny puts her out of humour, and then fhe vents her fpiten on the lervants, and probably will Sometimes upon you, my dear. However, you must follow this unerring rule, which is, to uSk right, and laugh at the reft; but not fo as to offend anyone ; What I mean by laughing, is, not to make yourfelf uneafy, beraufe fools a6l abfurdly. Let her follies be a lesson to you, to avoid pradsiSing what you contemn in her.’* Ashe came to titis period of his dif-courfe, we arrived at my uncle’s. My aunt prefented herfelf to us in the hall, and at her heels my uncle. She received my lather with an air of real joy, and me with a little ton of prc-tctsiion, which mortified my vanity. Is that Charlotte h* Said She: Come here, my pretty Dear; She’s a Sweet child; I ssiali be amazingly fond of her, I perceive then patted me on the cheek, and chucked me under the chin. My uncle kissed me, faying, I was a fine young lady, and ssiould make many a pretty fellow’s heart ach : To which my father anfwered, I hope not ; I would not have her Sityrized by the addresses of the fops and puppies of the prefent age.
But not to dwell too long upon trifles, I Shall hasten on uith my Story. My father, then, having stayed a week at my uncle’s, took his leave, in order to return home. This was the first time I was ever Separated from him, except when he made his Sliort excurfions to London y and I really believe, that the disuniting of the foul from the body could not have been more painful lo me. He feemed touched with my
fenfibility.
I
i
38 TheMEMOIRSof fenSib'lity, but chid me. Saying, Take care, child, lest what you may think an effeisi: of ten-dernefs, does not deviate (by its excels) into eitlier pastion or weaknefs; Subdue, Charlotte^ as much as poffible, the too lively fufceptibility of your heart; it will otherwife run away with	:
you, and then you will find it a Source of eternal	I
afflidion. Adieu, my dear girl, I Shall See you Some part of the winter in town.” So faying, he stepped into his chariot, and drove off.
We stayed about a month in the country after ray father had left us, when we fat out for Lon~ don. Nothing happened to us w'orth relating on the road ; my uncle and aunt stept most part of the way; I was employed in cathcing the former’s hat, which frequently fell off, as he nodded, and the coach jolted; this, with the ob- i jeds I met with on the road, (all of which were new to me,) made the journey not appear long, though we were three days in going the fame , ground, which we might now travel in one, ^ with eafe, fo much are the roads improved Since that time. I was extremely delighted at the I fight of London ; it appeared like a little world to me, from the number of its houfes, and the multitude of people I Saw in the streets. My uncle’s houfe was a very good one, and looked into the Park. The morning after our arrival, when I came down to breakfast, I found a young gentleman in my aunt’s dreffing-room, whom fhe immediately prefented to me, as the nephew and heir of my uncle. I took very little notice of him, excepting that I thought he was a good I pretty figure. He paid me many compliments, which I hardly attended to enough to appear civil j however, I thanked him, upon his offering
to
Mrs. W I L L I A M S.	39
to attend me to the play, opera, ridolto, Sec. for Sights were what my little heart Sighed after, much more than .admiration from the men.
As this young gentleman will be a principal a6lor in the first Scene of my life, I must beg leave to introduce him to your acquaintance ; He was about twenty years of age, rather tail than Short, remarkably well made, Slim, and genteel ; his complexion was fair ; he had light hair, and blue eyes, which expressed rather more good-nature than Senfe; he had, indeed, an inexhaustible fund of the former, nor was he in the least deficient in the latter: ^e w'as lively, had Some humour, and I could icon perceive was not a little in love with me: Put all thele ingredients together, and then add, that he was hardly ever out of my fight, and you will not think it Surprizing that I Should prefer him to any other of his fex, whom I Saw feldomer, and who, consequently, had lefs opportunities of making themfelves agreeable tome: In Short, I am perfuaded that I ssiould have been in love with him, had not my uncle and aunt defeated their own purpofes (which was our union) by making him the Spy over, and cenfor of, all my words and atsiions. I was never Suffered to go to any public place unaccompanied by him; and when they Saw any thing in me which they wished to reprove, they requested him to Shew me my errors, in the gentlest, and politest, terms poffible. With regret and fear, (as I have Since heard him declare,) he obeyed their orders punctually. I always listened to him with patience and good humour, and must confefs, that he could render even advice agreeable, from his manner of giving it; and would tell me of my
faults.
40 The MEMOIKS of
faults, without mortifying mon amour propre. Thus, whilst I listened and admired ^\\& Metiior, and friend, by what fatality I know not, the lover vanistied; I esteemed him, I valued him,
I would have trusted him with my life; but | whenever I thought of him as a hufband, a universal chillnefs ieized my whole frame, and I found that, in this point of view, he was become my averSion. I was extremely Shocked at this discovery, which I could no way account for, and was even alhamed to find, that my heart could rebel against the objed, which my reafon and judgment approved, and which had once (as I apprehended) been that of my choice.
I hoped time would restore me to reafon ; and, in order to bring myfelf the Sooner to it, 1 made a list of his virtues, differed his perfon, ( which* was really agreeable) and, in Sliort, almost fell in love with the pidlure I had drawn of him upon paper, whilst the original could not touch my heart. Sometimes, when I was left alone with him, he would talk of books, and other things, with So much good fenfe, perfpicuity, and liveliness, that I have looked at him, and thought within myfelf, he is amiable, and I do like him. When, upon his turning the conversation from general topics to his love of me, and perhaps approaching to take my hand, I have instantly been Seized with the fame fhivering, and have involuntarily Shrunk from his touch, as I Should have done from that of a viper. He often tenderly complained of my apparent aver-fiontohim; this thought, I perceived, preyed upon his Spirits j my uncle and aunt frequently reproached me with my want of Senfibility j in short, when they were remonstrating to me on
the
Mrs. william S.	41
the v'rtuei and accomplishments of my lover, and on ihe ahSurdity cf my behaviour to him, I wasotun tempted to leg of them to Surprize me into a marriage with him, (width rrught have been done at that time;) by which means I Should have been forced to have a£Ied right, and my duty, and a fenfe of honour, would, together, have contributed to have made me pur-fue the Saivie road to the end : But my extreme youth and modesty stripped my tongue, unhappily for me, as the event will prove.
In Short, the winter past between him and me in the Same manner ; I went every where, faw ever thing ; my father came lometimes, and never forgot to recommend to me not to ne-gleft my studies totally : I gave as much of my time as I could to rny masters, but, I must con-feSs, not So much as I *.;iight to have done. '
My aunt was often, very crofs, and my uncle and ste generally quarrelled twice every day, which was at dinner and Supper. The fubje<fts were, on her fide, complaints of the Servants, or his want of attention to her ; his were of the meat’s not being well-dressed, or of herfelf being very ill drested. It is true that her manner of putting on her cloaths was true-ly in the ssile of an old maid, and lie ufed to affront her extremely, by telling her, fhewould never rub off the rust Oie had been fo mar>y years contra£tlng ; to which ssie would anlwer in a manner which fometimes made me imagine that the converfation might become rather indelicate, fo I ufed generally to retire into my own room as loon as the table-cloth was removed, where I ssayed till 1 was informed that the coffee waited for me. On my rerurn into the
room,
42 The MEMOIRS OF
room, I always found my uncle fastasseep; and my aunt ufed to take that opportunity to obferve that She was convinced no two people could be happy in the married state, unleSs they had children ; to which observation I could make no reply, as I really knew nothing of the matter at that time ; but I have lived to fee many exceptions to this rule, and many instances of children being the Source of distention, rather than union, between their parents : And in either of thefe cafes I am of opinion, that the cauSe of ■ their disagreement lies in their own breasts, and does not proceed either from their having or not having children. Since if they really loved, valued, and esteemed each other their reciprocal friendship would render them invulnerable to the attacks of caprice and ill-humour. I have often reflefled, with grief and Surprize, at the * levity with which young people enter into the state of wedlock: We frequently fee, that if a Lady comes to visit Mifs’s Mamma, and astcs the favour of the young Lady’s company in the country for a month, the Mamma confenting. Mils will be very inquisitive and anxious to know the temper and disposition of the Lady She is to be fo long a lime with as four weeks, and will exprefs great apprehensions, that their humours may not fuit, (Ac. but let her fee an agreeable, handfome young Gentleman, whoSe figure pleafes her eye, and Ihe will immediately engage with him for life, without any of thofe fears or enquiries, which she thought So necef-fary in a cafe of fo much lefs importance ; not considering, that on the choice of a hushand depends (in all human probability) her future happinefs or mifery. Let me here beg leave to
give
Mrs. WILLI AMS.	43
give a word of advice to my own Sex ; Experience, and anextenSive knowledge of the world have taught me, that whenever any woman eS-tablilhes her happinefs in the marriage state, on any other bafis than that of gaining and deferv-ingher hulband’sestecm, fhe willfindfhehasbuilt upon Sand : Passion may, and muss, in time wear out, but wherereafon approves,friendship will always be the confequence. Hold a man of worth and honor by that tie, and you hold him for life; be you Sure not to be in the uorong, and I will anfwer for his Soon being in the righty though he may perhaps at first not entirely agree with you in the definition of thefe two important points. If you have been deceived, and have married a libertine, he will, at least. So far ref-pe6f your virtues, as to wear a malk before you, unlefs he be a monster indeed; and perhaps (for I have Seen Such instances) he may admire virtue in you, till be catches the emanation —.
But I digrefs too far, and, I fear, trefpafs upon your patience. To turn to my story.
It was now the feafon when every body wisti-es to leave the dusty streets of London for green fields and a purer air; accordingly, my uncle and his family, his nephew Sir Charles Stanly^ and mylelt. Set out for--Jhir^, where we ar-
rived in much better health than temper, for my uncle and aunt had quarrelled all the way, and I had fat next my lover during the whole journey j a ciicumstance which was no way to his advantage, and gave me great pain, as it convinced me, that my distikeof him was now increafed into a confirmed antipathy of his per-fon : 1 his proceeded, I believe, from his having entertained me all the way with the strongest
44 TheMEMOIRSof
eft assurances of the force of his passion, a fub-je6t which, I have already obferved, always rendered him odious to me. I was delighted when I found m} Self releaSed from this conversation, by our arrival at -, where, after
staying Some days, I went to my father’s, I was received by him with rapture, with civility by my mother, and with real joy by my dear Sophia. In the courfe of a month’s viSit, which * I made to my father, he took frequent occasions of telling me, how rejoiced he was to find that I was dessined to be the wife of Sir Charles Stanly. “ He is (continued my father) every thing my. heart could wissi the man to be, whom I would have chofe tor your hulband ; he has a fine e,state, you can have no objedtion to his per- j foil, for that is handloine, and his understand- | ing isun vcrfally allgued to be uncommonly cul- ' tivated tor lo yt>ung a man ; besides, he is per-fedlly good-natured and well-bied, and I think you peculiarly fortunate to be the choice of fo accomplilhed a Gentleman. You, my Dear,
I am perfuaded, are lenlibie of your, own hap-pinefs, and will, I make no doubt, deferve the continuance of it, by exerting your utmost endeavours towards making a go^ d wife, mother, and mistrefs.” Here he paiifed, and looked steadfastly at me : I durst make no reply : The awe in which I stood of iny father, the deference I paid to his judgment, in Ihort, the con-fciouSnefs that all he had faid was truth* except that part of his dilcourfe which concerned my-felf; all thefe considerations tied my tongue:	-
And thus, by my silence, I confirmed him in	I
the.belief, that 1 had no objection to the mar-	[
rying Sir	No time, however was yet
fixed
Mrs. williams.	45
fixed for our nuptials, as I was thought to be rauch too young to take upon me the care of a family. In this dilemma I ufed Sometimes to flatter mySelf with the hope, that time, perhaps, would cure me of a caprice I could no way account for, and which my reafon invariably condemned. I wished to love Sir Charles Stanly, with as much ardor as ever a forfaken maid did to forget the objeS which had betrayed and undone her, and with equal fuccefs; that is to Say, without any. In this difagreeable situation of mind I continued for near two years, which I Spent with my uncle and aunt; during which time nothing material happened to me. Every body knew I was engaged, consequently no body made any propofals of marriage to me ; fo that I Spent my life in one continued insipid monotony ; till a Lady, an intimate acquaintance of my aunt’s happened to come and Spend a few weeks with her in the country. She was a lively, agreeable, well-bred. Sensible woman; and took Such a liking to me, that Ihe would hardly Suffer me to be a moment out of her sight; and when the time came that Ihe was to return to her own feat, which was in the North, She begged fo ardently of my aunt to Spare me for a couple of months during the Summer, that She, who had been attached to her from infancy, (as they had been educated at the fame School together) could not refufe her, though She Seemed to confent relu8;antly; and made me promise not to exceed the time, as She positively declared. She could Spare me no longer than for two months. I affured her of my obedience to her will, and in a few days afterwards the Lady and I fat out, in her chariot, for the
North.
46 TheMEMOIRSof
North. The journey delighted me ; for now, for the first time of my life, I felt the charms of liberty; I Seemed to breath a purer air ; my little heart beat with tranfport, on the reflection that I was mistrefs of my own words and aQ;ions.
I never fulpe£fed that I could err, whilst I followed the di£fates of innocence and nature; and imagined that old folks were good for nothing, but to torment young ones; and that all the leflfons of prudence, with which they eternally stunned one’s ears, were only calculated to keep one continually by their Side, in order either to entertain them, or elfe to prevent their ever being left alone. I never apprehended, that experience, and a knowledge of life, were necef-Sary ingredients to guide us with Safety through it; nor could I conceive, that it required any art tocondu6l one’s felt well in the world, fince I fuppofed that to mean well, and to a£l fo, were Synonymous terms. In this dilpoSition I arrived at Lady Betty RuJfeVs feat: It was an ancient, but noble manfion, and not far from the county town, where, (he told me, the races would begin in a few days; and added, that she propofed taking a lodging there for the week, as she fancied the balls, concerts, &c.	[
which there would be every night during the race week, might afford me Some amufement. I was infinitely pleafed with the propofal, and thanked her Ladyship for her obliging attention; assuring her, at the fame time, that all places must be agreeable to me wliere she was. A few days after my arrival at Lady Betty'I received a letter from Sir Charles^ filled with the tenderest profeflions of his inviolable love for me; he begged, in the most pathetic manner,
that
M R s. W I L L I A M S. /	47
that I would steel my heart against the attacks it would inevitably meet with, in a part of the world where, probably, every one would be ignorant of my engagement to him; he conjured me to conSider, that his life depended on my fidelity, &c. I did weigh and confider all theSe things very maturely, during the few days which
preceded our going to---------. I had, however,
in that (hort time. Seen many genteel as well as rustic beaus, who came to pay their reSpe£ls to Lady Betty \ but hitherto no one of their fex had taught me to know, that I had a heart capable of loving; I had, indeed, often wifhed to love, but then it was only for the fake of another that I did fo ; I never had propofed any pleafure to myfelf from it. In this state of total indifference, then, I fat out for ----- races.
The first day we went upon the courSe, where the horles ran, I was prodigioufly furprized at the number and magnificence of the equipages I faw there ; I had never before Seen Such a concourfe of genteel people, excepting in London \ the novehy of the Sport, the finenefs of the weather, in Ihort, all contributed to amufe and delight me. We returned from the field in the evening, drank tea, and then prepared to go to the assembly- I had never taken any pleafure at my toilette : for though I was always well-dressed, (which means with propriety) yet it was my maid’s taste rather than my own, that had the merit of it. However, on this day, for the first time in my life, I named the gown I would wear, chofe myfelf the ribbands, &c. which I thought would Suit it best; in Ihort, I directed the toilette. Fanny^ my maid, fmiled, on obferviugme, and Said, “ I fancy. Madam,
you
.48 TheMEMOIRSof
you have fome conquest in view to-night, by the attention you Shew to your drefs; 1 never faw you give yourfelf any concern about it before.” I was struck at thejustnefsof the girl’s remark, and immediately astced myfelf the rea-fon, without being able to find it out. Had I known the human heart then, as well as I do now, the problem would not have been difficult to Solve; in Short, my destined hust)and was not near me, and in that moment I did not re-collecS: that I was engaged. I had hardly finished dressing, when a Servant catne to inform me, that his Lady and the coach waited for me : I' made my apologies for not being ready Sooner. Lady Betty fmiled, and told me, “ That my time had been well employed. Since my cloaths were put on with the utmost taste.” She then faid, She.had a favour to a(k of me, which was. That I would give her leave to dire6l my choice of a partner; fo far as that if any one assced me to dance, I, would anfwer, I was en* gaged, unlefs She gave me a jog, either with her foot or elbow ; becaufe, faid She, in all theSe public places there are gamesters and pick-pock-efs, who affume the habit and appearance of Gentlemen; therefore 1 would wiSh you to dance with Some body that I either know by name, or by fi^ht.” I promifed to comply with her request. On our arrival at the rooms, I was charmed and Surprized at the beauty of the building; the company was numerous and brilliant. After the Women of (.Dality had danced minutes, I was taken out by a noble Lord, whom I had known in London. The dance done, he assced me, Who he ssiould fend me (which is the phrafe.) I anfwered, I knew
no
Mrs, WILLIAMS.	49
no body, and therefore begged liis LordHiip would chufe for me;” he bowed, and left me; when, in an instant, I perceived a young Gentleman, dressed in wliite and Silver, advance towards me. I thought him the most agreeable figure I had ever Seen. \Vhen we had finistied the minuet, he handed me to my feat, and Said, Madam, if you are not engaged for country dances, I beg to have the honor of being your partner.” I curt’fey’d assent ; and he took out a young Lady, who fat next to me, to dance the Second minuet with. My eyes followed him; I thought he danced better than any body in the room; and my good friend. Lady Betty, had afked me, ten times, who he was, before I had caught the found Sufficiently to anfwer her, which I did, however, at last, with Some confuston, faying, “ I did not know, but I fup-pofed hiaa*to be a Gentleman, Since Lord C--had Sent him to me.” She replied, “ As to that, rny Dear, his figure and manner will be his Security on that head. I found he was fo much the favouriteof the Ladies, that hedanced four minuets to any other perfon’s two, and was at last obliged to quit tlie room, to avoid being called upon a..y more. As Soon as the company stood up to country dances, he fiev;’' to me, took me by the hand, and placed me
next to Lady Diana H--, who, I perceived,
was an acquaintance of his. After the first dance, which was fatiguing, as the weather wgs excessively hot, and we were more than thirty couple, he propofed fitting down : I know not why, but I dreaded his conversation, arai therefore (though tired to death) defired to stand up the next dance ; He obligingly complied : How-VoL. I.	D	ever.
50 The MEMOIRS or ever, that finhhed, my legs refiiSed their office and I was neccffitated to own myfelf fatigued.
I went to Seek Lady Betty, hoping that her presence would prevent the conversation between my partner and me, from becoming interesting,; but, unfortunately for me,'I found her engaged in a party at whist. Surrounded by a crowd of peo^dc, ib that I coiild not approach her; therefore, with a palpitation at my heart, which I could not very well account for, T was obliged to feat myfelf upon a bench, when, as you may fuppoSe, my partner placed himfelf next me. 1 began the converfation by observing, that the weather was very hot, the room very full,
I much fatigue4s and a pack of stuff of that fort. When he replied, “ That he never danced but for the Sake of having an agreeable partner, eSpecially in hot weather, as he thought i the exercife much too violent; adding, that if he had been So unhappy as to have found me engaged that night, lie Should, most certainly, not have danced at all.” I bowed to this compliment. He continued the converfation, by obferving the effeSts of Sympathy, which he proved from the being forcibly struck at the first fight of one amiable objefif more than another:
He faid, “ That the heart decided its choice en tyrant, and that Sometimes So defpoticly, as to Subdue both reafon and prudence in the pur-fuit; How happy, then, (continued he) must that perfon be, whofe judgment and reafon both approve of the choice, which his heart, from an irrefistible impulle, had been compelled to make.’* Here he paufcd, as Seeming to wait my reply. I faid, “ That a passion. Such as he had been defcribing, founded only on the
fenfes,
t
Mrs. WILLIAM S,	51
-Senfes, could not, I apprehended, be of any dangerous conSequence, as it would probably be of very Short duration.” So faying, I role from my feat, telling him, that Somebody had just called up a favourite dance of mine, which I begged he would not refufe going down with me: He complied with reluflance, but I inSist-cd, as I dreaded the continuance of a converfa-tion, which had already very much embarrassed me. As Soon as Lady Betty had finistied her party, stie came to us, from which time I danced no more, as She now made a third in the conversation. She Seemed much pleaSed with my partner, who payed her all imaginable reSpeft and attention-; he handed us to our coach, wilh-cd us a good night, and took his leave. I had learnt his name at the tea-table, where he Seemed to be known to every body but me; I need not tell it you. Since it is that I now bear. In the coach, as we went home,	Betty alked
me, “ How I liked Mr. Williams I replied,
“ Very well; and added, I think he is a well-bred agreeable young Gentleman.'*’ He is,
I find (Said Lady Betty) the only Son of an old acquaintance of mine; his father, I am told, is immenfely rich ; the means by which he became So he must anfwer for himfelf: As to the mother of the young Gentleman, I have known her from my infancy, and she is a Senfible, worthy woman as lives; her father was a Gentleman of an ancient family in this county, and lived in my neighbourhood ; the young man is very like his mother in perfon ; I hope he has her mind too, and in that cafe, he has nothing left to wish for.” I l.stened to this difcourSe of Lady Betty^s with great attention, and found D 2	myfelf
52 THE MEMOIRS ov
myfelf mortified, on hearing that his father'’s charaSler was equivocal, efpecially upon So important a point as that of proliity : I however immediately checked my fenfibihty on this fub-je6f, by afking myfelf. What his father was to me? And instantly changed thediScourfe. The next morning Mr. Williams waited upon us, to enquire after our healths, with the ufual compliment, of hoping we had got no cold the preceding evening ; w!)en, not waiting for an an-fwer, he Said, “ You go again>to-night to the rooms, Lyadies, I fuppofe ?” I replied, \VY intended going.” “ Then, Madam, (he Said)
I beg you would honor me with your hand this evening in the country dances^ you cannot be | already engaged, for it is So early, that I am the first vifiter you have had to-day, (in all probability,) and, indeed, I came thus Soon, in order, if possible, to fecure you for my partner.”
I could not Siy I was engaged, and therefore an-fwered, that I would dance with him that night, but not the following one, becaufe it was not ufual for a young Lady to dance three niglus confecutively with the fame Gentleman, and that I wissted always to avoid being particular, tie Said, custom was a tyrant, but that he Should never difpute my will; he hoped, however, that the fourth night would not admit of the fame obje6iion : To which I made no anfwer.
To Ihorten my story, then, I Saw him every
day during my stay at —----; He had engaged
my affedfions before I myfelf had any fuSpicions that my attachment to him was of any other » nature than that of liking his company, as an agreeable, chearful companion. I have fre-•quently obferved, that perldns become more intimately
Mrs. WILLIAMS.	53
rnately acquainted with one another in Seven stays, at any of thefe public meetings, than one Should probably be in as many years from only viSiting them in London. Thus 1, having past
most part of my time, during our stay at ----
races, in company with Mr. IVilliams, by which means we became So intimate, that I looked upon him as an old acquaintance, and even ventured, with all the confidence of fifteen, to decide him to be a modest, well-bred, worthy, fenSible, young Gentleman. Having thus drawn his pi6lure, in my mind’s eye, (as Shakejfear fays^ his perfonal charms did not fail to heighten the colouring, and you will eafily agree with me, that Such a pifture, placed in a heart, on which no prior imprestion had been made, must naturally produce a powerful effefi. It did fo; for I found, with no Small Shame and terror, that the being Separated fp5:nn him w-ould be painful to me ; however, I flattered mySelf with the hopes, that I fhculd conquer my weakneSs, by absence from the_obje£fof it: Accordingly, 1 had virtue and strength enough left, to prefs
Lady Betty to leave -------, Saying, “ I was
fatigued to death w'ith noiSc, and bustle, and , longed to enjoy the peaceful Scene which the country affc^sted.” She willingly complied with
my request, and we left------the eighth day
from our arrival in it. On the morning of our departure, Mr. Williams handed us into the coach, and, with a look full ot inexprestible ten-derneSs, Seized my hand. Saying, “ May you, dear Madam, enjoy in your Solitude, that peace, of which, I fear, you have for ever robbed rny breast.” To this harangue I made no anfwer, but by a bluSh. He then addressed l^ady Betty, D 3	telling
54 T u E M E M OI R S o F
telling her. That he purpofed Spending a few weeks with a friend of his, who lived in her Ladyfhip’s neighbourhood, when he hoped (he would give him leave, to have the honour of paying his refpefls to her, and Mifs Rutland^ (which was me.) She bowed, and, with the most gracious air, astured him, That fhe stiould be extremely glad to fee him, for his own fake, as well as for that of her old friend’s, his amiable mother; and added, that she Should esteem it as a favour, if he wmuld come and Spend a few days with her at her feat; faying, that she would do every thing In her power to render it agreeable to him. Mr. Williams thanked her Ladyship for the honor she did him, and told her, that he accepted of her obliging invitation with the greatest pleafure, as well as with the highest fenfe of the favour she did him. I trembled at the thought, but tried, how^ever, by every means, to hide from them the confu-Sion this conversation had flung me into. During our short journey, my good friend, Lady Bettj'y entertained me, all the way, with the praifes she bestowed on Mr. Willaimsy expreff-ing her fatisfaCiion in the thoughts of feeing him at her own houfe. Unhappily for me. Lady Betty was perfe£Uy convinced, that my affedli-ons were fixed upon Sir Charles Stanly^ and, like a virtuous woman, she judged it impoflible that I should engage my hand to one man, and lofe my heart to another ; fo took it for granted, that they were both difpofed of, and, con-iequently, she looked upon me as being invulnerable to all foreign attacks. She reafoned right, had her hypothcfis been fo; but having erred, in the manner of stating the propofition,
she
Mks. WILLIAMS..	55
She blundered on, till, inadvertently, She was ih Some meafiire, the means of my becoming one of the most unhappy of women. I now endeavoured, by every argument that reafon could Suggest, to steel my heart against the arrival of Kir.Williams\ but, alas! hovv weak is reafon, when oppoftd to fenfation, at the age of fifteen ! I was often tempted to open my heart t'o I'.ady Bettyy and to beg her to aid me with her prudence, and experience, to Subdue myfelf; but modesty instantly Suppressed the thougiu'; for a girl ot my age to confefs herfelf to be in love 1 and that at a time too, w'hen her parents had directed her choice to another ohje£l> must-have been construed as the height of imprudence,, and diSobedience ; I therefore determined to inform Mr. Williams of my engagement to Sir Charles, if ever he came to an open declaration of his passion; and by So doing, I took it for granted, I fhould put a total end to all his farther pretenSions on that head. Thus foitified, I felt myfelf strong, and my fear of feeing him was infinitely decreafed. Let me here remark, that reafon is never So near a precipice as when it rests Secure on its own strength: A diffidence of our own judgment, and fortitude, is the Safest guide through life ; Had I followed this maxim, at the period I am now writing of, I fhould have immeiliately returned to my uncle Bcldby''s, and by that means have avoided an adt, uTiich fifteen years of Severe punishment has not yet expiated. 'She world will Sometimes forgive us our follies, but the delicate, fenfibie mind, can never either lorgiveor lorget its own faults, eSpccially when they are of a nature which leligion must contemn, and D 4	prudence
5 <5 T H 2 MEMOIRS or
prudence difapprove. I write under the impulSe of thole feelings, which I here endeavour to< I deferibe. But to my story.	I
On my arrival at Lady Betty'*% feat, I found letters from my father, my aunt, and ^\t Charles Stanly \ the two first were tending to the fame purpofe, viz. destring me to return, with-^ out fail, at the expiration of my two months leave ot abfence, becaufe my father and mother were to accompany my uncle, aunt, and Self,. to London, in order to astist at the celebration of my nuptials v.ith Sir Charles, which they had fixed for an early month in the approaching winter; and, for that reafon, fliould leave the country Sooner than ufual, that I might have time to equip myfelf properly for the ceremony My lover’s letter was that of a man of fenfe, elevated with the hope of Shortly poffestlng the woman he loved ; his stile was pastionate, but delicate. I was Seized with a univerfal tremor on perustng thefe letters; my blood retired to my heart; and I felt myfelf in a state of terror and defpondency, which I can neither deferibe nor account for. In this Situation of mind I had stung myfelf into a great chair, which was in my room, where I might, probably, have remained Some time, had ntt my reveries been interrupted by the entrance ot a Servant, who faid, “ Madam, Mr Williams is below, and my Lady begs you would be fo obliging as to go down to him, as stie is at prefent engaged with fome of her tenants about bustnefs; stie destres. Madam, that you would make her apologies to the Gentleman, and assure him, that She will wait on him as Soon as possible.” I started up at the name of Mr. Williams-, and, from hav-
ii^g
M R s. W I L L I A M S,	57
ing been as cold as death, felt the blood /glow in my cheeks, and circulate with rapidity through all my veins. It was with difficulty I colle6Ied mySelf Sufficiently to tell the Servant, that I would obey his L/ady’s commands immediately.
As Soon as the man was gone, I endeavoured to calm my Spirits, and to affume an air of coin-poSure, which the palpitation of my heart strongly oppoSed: However, I called to mind the resolution I had formed, of ending Mr. Williams'^ pretenSions, by an honest avowal ot my being contradled to another : This thouglit again gave me courage, and by the timelarrival the parlour door, I fancied my heart invulnerable to every attack which might be made upon it. I entered, and accosted Mr. Willtatns with Lady Betty’s compliments, and apologies for not waiting upon him immediately. He looked at me, and, in a pathetic tone of voice.
Said, “ You cannot be ignorant, Madam, that though I made Lady Betty Rujfel the pretence, yet my viSu was to you,, and therefore I can ca-Sily excufe her ahfence.’^ I anfwered, “ That 1 was much obliged to him ; but that I thought my friend deServed her Share ol the compliment, from the real regard which She professed having fpr himfelf and family ; whereas I am, (Said I,) almost a perfeSi stranger to them both.” “ You can be none to my heart, (he replied,) Madam,
Since it has been in your possession ever Since the first moment I had the pleaSure (or perhaps the misfortune) of feeing you.” Just as he had fi- , niffied thefe words, tlie parlour door opened, and the Lady of the houfe entered the room ; fortunately, stie was too much occupied with the joy ot feeing	Williams^ to obterve my
D 5	confusion.
58 The MEMOIRS of
confulion, which was, indeed, very great. She pressed him to stay dinner, which, with great politenefs, he declined, faying, “ 'J'hat he had given his word to return to his friend’s houfe, in order to meet a fcledl company, w ho were invited to dine there, intirely upon his account. Lady Betty then reminded him of the promife
he had made her at --, of Spending two or
three days with her; he bowed, and (he instst-ed upon his fixing the time; which, after Some compliments of thanks, he did for the 'fhurf-day following. On naming the day, he fixed his eyes upon me, as if he defired to read in my face, whether I stiould be pleafcd or difpItaSed at having him in the houfe with me. My eyes met his, and I felt my<eU hliifh. What lie attributed this emotion to, I then knew not, nor, indeed, could I myfelf, at that time, decide, whether it proceeded from piealure or pain, or, jierhaps, from neither : In Short, at fitteen we are very bad Metaphyficians; content with the ccnSequence, we never look up to the caufe ; it is an age in which fenfation is x\\t primum mobile of all our adfions, and therefore (baling the cenfequences of error) the happiest part of our lives; every objefl around us has the charm of novelty, the exterior pleafes, and we never attempt to look behind the curtain, till experience, disappointment, and apathy, dissipate the illuSi-on, and we begin to fee through a truer medium ; at which period we become undoubtedly wifer, but do we become happier ? The Many, I fear, do not; the Few, I know'', do. I’hofe who purfue wifdom, and attain her, are the only human beings who may justly be stlled happy, becaufe it is not in incident to make them other-
wife ;
Mrs. W I L n I A M S.	59
wife; their hfippinels is concentied in ihem-felves ; it is buiit upon a perfect resignation to the dispensations oS an all-vviSe Providence, and a thorough knowledge of the instability ot human events, as well as a perfect conv,(Sfion of the insignificancy of either pain, or pleaSuie, on So flight a tenure, and So thort a duration,
as that of our existence here.-----
Excufe this digrestlon.------The interval be-
tween Mr. Williams's vifit, and the time appointed for his return, was five days, during which period I had a continual dread upon my Spirits. I fincerely wiShed for the power of avoiding him, by leaving the houfe of Lady Betty ; but this could not be done, w iihout avow--ing my weaknefs for him ; a humiliation, w hich my vanity would not conSent to, though my reaSon strongly urged the ncccstlty of luch a confestion ; In short, in this, as in moSt other instances of the hke nature, my judgment w as hy I'amour propre. I w i ote, however, to Sir Charles Stanly^ in a more obliging stile thanufual, vainly imagining that I fortified my-felf against my weaknefs, by binding thoSe chains still stronger, which both duty and reafon called upon to regard as indiffoLuble. Thus S.rtisfied at having obtained (as 1 thought) a kind of victory over myfelf, I repofed under my laurels, determining not to make any farther enquiries into the fituation of my mind with regard to Mn WiUiamSf as I was peifefitly reSolved to obey my parents. In this state of Security I faw him arrive on Thurfday, without any Sensible emotion in my heart; I was even chearful-ler than ufual in his company, for which reafon he was more Serious; I raillied him upon his
gravity, ^
6o TheMEMOIRSof gravity, he complimented me upon my extreme gjliety } upon which Lady Betty Said, with a fmile, “ Mils Rutland is in the right to laugh as long as Ihe can ; for (continued She) though I am perfuaded She will be happy in her choice, yet matrimony is apt to make one grow Serious in time.” Mr. Williams took what Lady Betty had Said as a general reflection, which might have, with equal propriety, been addrelS-cd to any other young Lady, as well as to me ; for which reafon he replied, with vivacity. That he apprehended the marriage state, when two hearts were united, to be the only fource of happinefs on earth adding, “ he had long been perfuaded, that without that tender union of hands *nd hearts, life would not be worth the purchafe.” Lady Betty, looking at me, Said, “ You See, my dear, that young people can praiie matrimony as well as we old ones, who have experienced it,, and who, you. frequently fay, only fpeak well of it, to draw Others into the fame Snare ; but we fhall find you become one of its most zealous advocates^ before many months are past, or I am much mistaken in my conje^ures. I looked down,, and made no anfwer.. When Mr, Williams, in a low faultering voice, aflted, Is the young Lady fo near being matried. Madam addrefS-irig himfelf to Lady Betty. “ Yes, Sir, (fhe replied,) it is no Secret that Mils Rutland has been Some time engaged to Sir Charles Stanly,. and I learn from her friends, that the wedding i*s ihorily to be cOnStimrhated.” Here a Silence of forhe rtsinute-s enSufed ; when perceiving the paleneft and deje<Stion, which had Spread ihem-ielves over Mr. Williainfi face, I rofe, and Said
to
Mrs. \V I L LI a M S.	6i.
\
to hady Betty, “ Do, Madam,, favour us with a tune upon the harpSichord, and I will accompany you with my guitarre.” “ Not So, (She replied,) but if you will Sing, I will play, with all my heart.” I could not refufe, becauSe my defign, in interrupting the dilcourfe, was to draw I.ady	attention from Mr. Williams'^
whofe countenance had fuffered So vifible an alteration, that I feared fne might have perceived it. Her Ladyssiip pitched unfortunately upon * Arne’s Cantata, called Lydia', I obje£le.DcC it, declaring 1-could not Sing it ; but Ihe knowing 1 could, anfwered, rather peeviShly, “ Well, if you won’t fing, I won’t play.” I felt the cruelty of Singing this long to Mr. Williams,^ but it was unavoidable ; he stood behind my chair, and I could hear him-Sigh frequently, as if his heart was breaking. I would have given the world to have ceafed tormenting him, but it was not my buSinefs to fuppofe that I gave him any uneaSinefs.
You know the Song, Adelaide, as, at your request, I transtated it for you. The Cantata, finilhed, we quitted the harpfichord j and, during the rest of the evening, I carefully avoided looking at him. Since 1 tound pity was nearly allied to love; neither he, nor I, were very lively, but we both strove to appear So, till the slofck struck twelve, when we took leave of each other, and retired into our apartments. As foon as I found myfelf alone, I recollected the conversation which had pasted that afternoon, and
* The name of tht Cantata is torn out of the fmn«fcript;
I fupplied il with that of Ljtlia, as thinking it a-prepos, though it ceftaihly was not publiftied at that period of time which the Lady writei of.
was
62	Th E M E M O I R S o F
was pleaScd that Lady Betty had told Mr. PFiF Hams that I was going to be married. I hoped that this information, joined to the reSoIution I had formed, of avoiding ever being left alone with him, would Secure me from any farther purfuits of his, on the topic of love. My heart feemed to exult, in thus thinking itfelf free from danger j and yet I found an unufual weight upon my fpirits: I Sighed involuntarily, and felt that I was unhappy, without being able to account for the reafon of my being fo;, (for I had perfuaded myfelf that I only liked Mr. Williams, but did not love him ;) the next morning, however, let me into the Secret. 1 had Some partridges, which I was very fond of, and which I kept at the end of the garden,sin a room whicst had been formerly a fummer-houfe, Sittiated fo as to have a view, on one Side, of a dead wall, and, on the other of a stable-yard; fuch, I have frequently obferved, was the taste of our ancestors ; it had been, by the prefent Miftrefs ofthe mansion, converted into a tool rocm for the Gardener, till I put the partridges iirto it. I was Set, with a penSive air, upon the only chair in the place, feeding my birds, when, all of a fudden, I perceived Mr. Williams at my feet ; a universal tremor Seized my nerves,, when, starting from my Seat, 1 exclaimed, “ Good God, Sir, how came you here ? What do you mean ?” He held me fast by the hand, and forcibly re-feated me in the chair, faying, “ Pardon me, charming Mifs Rutland^ if my defpair offends you ; I came only to obtain your pity, or to expire at your feet.’^ I interrupted him with Some vivacity, telling him, ** That he knew my hand was engaged to another, and
therefore
hi R s. W I L L I A M S. 63
therefore I looked upon this declaration, of his love of me, as an infult done to my honor ; and that if he expelled me to have any farther ef-teem for him, he must defist from ever mentioning his passion more, which (1 added) I wifh-ed, for his own fake, he would get the better	!
of, as, I flattered myfelf, he was convinced, that I had too high a fenfe of both my duty and honor, ever to Swerve from the engagements I had voluntarily entered into with Sir CharlesStanlyd'*
So Siying, with an air of refentment I rofe from my chair. He still held me w'ith a convulfive grafp ; and, with a voice which betrayed the agitation of his Spirits, Said, “ Yes, cruel girl,
I did know that your hand was engaged to another, but, till this monent, I was not ceitain that your heart was fo too.” At thefe words I Sighed involuntarily, and my eyes, I believe, loll Some part of their Severity : 1 assumed, however, courage enough to fay, “ Sir, I inSist upon your letting me go; I have no account to render you of my private Sentiments ; let it fuf-sice for you to know, that I never can be yours.”
Upon which I quitted thefummer-houfe abruptly, and, with a precipitate step, hurried to my owTi room. He did not offer to follow me.
It would be impossible for me here to deferibe the flutter of Spirits, and confuSion of ideas, this adventure had flung me into: I felt a pain at my heart, and a difficulty in breathing which almost Suffocated me : I diiist not venture to enquire, too minutely, into the cauSe of this amaxing perturbation of my mind : Had I done So, it is highly probable, that I should have found it out; but I still flattered myfelf in the belief, that
Idid
64 TheMEMOIRSof did not love Mr. Williams. I knew I pitied him, and ihu I was Sincerely Sorry that 1 diflik-ed the man I was going to marry; but I had never once dared to alk myfelS, whether or no I did not with that he had been destined tor my hustiand instead of Sir Charles ? This question, fairly stated, and honestly anfw'ered, would have inevitably let me into the nature of my difeaSc. An incident, which happened a day or two after, unveiled the mystery, and Shewed me clearly, the real Situation of my heart.—But to return to my story. As Soon, then, as my Spirits became a little calm, I tried to regulate and examine into the multitude of ideas, which had Tufhed impetuousty upon my imagination during the Scene in the garden. I afked myfelf cooly, if the having inSpired an agreeable young Gentleman with a pastion for me, was in itSelf any thing very new, or extraordinary, and what evil could acruc to me from it, fince I was contracted to another, and had totally put an end to all farther importunities from Mr. Williams, by the conversation which occaSioned my preSent uneaSineSs ? I had no Sooner pronounced in my mind (if I may be allowed the exprestlon) the word end, than I felt a pang at my heart, which in Spite of the deSirel had to believe the contrary, proved to me where the wound lay, and from whence it proceeded: I was shocked at the discovery ; So shocked, that, like a child as I was, I determined to leave the event to chance, as I could form no plan for my future behaviour, which did not either clash with my duty or inclination. '’J'hus delivered up to incident, and the little share of reaSon I had. Silenced, from a belief that it was only capable of
vexing.
Mrs. W I L L I a M S.	65
■vexing me, and not judicious enough to extricate me out of my perplexiiies, I found mystlf much more at my eafe than I had been for Some time:
In confequence of which, I went down to dinner, with an air of gaiety and good humour, which, no doubt. Surprized Mr.; and must have indicated to him, that the Scene	I
which past between ns, in the morning, had not ctSended me io highly, as I had endeavoured to make him believe it did, when I quitted the Summer-houfe. However, though I had turned off the only pilot which could have faved me from Shipwreck, yet the natural modesty and pride of my fex, made me behave with great referve to our guest; for let it ,be remarked, ^ that, though I had defpaired of a6sing right, I had by no means determined to a6l wrong, although the one is the natural confequence of the other; but I did not fee So far as that, at the period I am writing of. We had company dined with us that day, v/hich made the cool referve, with which I treated Mr. Williams, pafs unobserved by Lady Betty. In the afternoon, as 1 was making tea, Mr. Williams came to the table, and alked me for a lump of Sugar, which as I was giving him, he artfully Aid a' paper, folded in the form of a letter, into the Sugar difli, and went instantly back to his chair; the next difh of tea I Sent him, I put the letter into the fame place, and Setting it upon the tea-board, Sent it him back again. I law his eyes Sparkle with vexation on its being thus returned; however, I was pleafed to fee him take it, concluding from thence, that I Should receive no more billet-doux from him ; but, to my great Surprize, as foon as the tea things were removed.
I
66 Thb M EM OI R S of
ed, he arofe, and, advancing towards tlte dropped, or rather threw,^ the letter into this middle of the floor, near where FTat. Eady Betty Said, “ Kir. IVilliams, you have let a let-tei tall out ot your pocket, I believe.” To which he anfwered, with the most perfest indifference,. “ No, Madam, it is none of mine.”
In that instant, the fear of Lady ZteZ/j’s reading its contents, got the better of every other con-lideration ; I therefore stooped down, and pick- I ed up the letter, which lay almost at my feet, faying (though not without great contuSion,)/ j “ That I believed it to be mine.” I carelully j avoided leaving the room all the rest of the i evening,.lest Mr. Williams fliould imagine thatl had retiredsth read it We played at cards till fuppertime, when the company left us, all but our guest, who chatted away with Lady Betty till bed-time ; when upon going up stairs, her Ladyfhip turned into my room, instead of her own J then, with a nod, diSmifSing my maid, site Said, Seating herfelf in a chair, “ Pray, my Dear, what was the history of that paper which Sellout of Mr. WUliams's pocket? for I cannot think it belonged to you, though you fo readily owned it.” “ Your Ladyfhip judged very right, (I replied ;) the paper did really belong to Mr. Williams-., it contained a copy of verfes, wrote in praiie of my (pretended) beauty ; I fancy the Gentleman was affronted that I had returned them to him, and therefore stiing them upon the floor, where I did not chule they fhould continue to be, lest one of the company might pick them up, and read then% to the rest; to prevent which, I owned th^ paper, and, the first opportunity 1 could find
condemned
Mrs. W I L L I A AI S.	6)
condemned it to the flames.’* Lady Betty Said, “ 7 hank yon, my Dear, for clearing this affair to me ; but give me leave to tell you that if you quarrel with every body who tells you that they think you handfome, I am afraid you must declare war against all the male fex.” I bowed to this compliment. She then afked me “ If I had any fufpicions of Mr. Williapis being in love with me ?” I anfwered, No, indeed Madam, how can that be ? Since he knows I am almost married to Sir Charles StanlyS* She kissed me, and, wistiing me a good night, went into her own appartment.
I cannot help obferving here, the velocity with w'hich we tread the paths of vice, how' all her paths are linked, and ho imperceptibly we glide on from one step to another, in that pernicious road. It was not twelve hours Since I had abandoned ReaSon, as an insufficient guide, and delivered myfelf up to Incident, and Sen-fation ; and in that fhort Space of time, I had injured the truth twice, and had deceived my friend ; and all this with an air of confidence, which Surprized myfelf.
Thus far embarked in error, I proceeded to look at the letter, with an intention, however, of fending it back to him unopened ; but, when I came to examine it, I found it without afeal; tempted by this circumstance, which rendered it impossible for Mr. Williams to be certain wliether I did, or did not, read.it, I thought that, luppoSingl Ihould refill my curiofity of looking at its contents, no advantages would accrue to me from Such an a6t of prudence ; as he might Suppofe the contrary, if hechoSe it, and most probably w'ould do fo, for many obvious
reafons.
68 T H E M E M O I R S o F
reaSons. This decided,! read the letter; it began’ by aSking pardon for having Surprized me, that morning, in the fummer-houSe, attributing his intruSion to the violence of his patTion, and begging me to give him a quarter of an hour’s audience in the fame place, either the next, or the following day, at twelve at noon ; assuring r me, tliat if, after having fully explained himfelf,
I ssiould still continue inflexible, he gave me his word of honor, that he never more would mention the fubjedt to me ; though the keeping his promife would probably cost him his life.
After having read this eloquent epistle, I concluded, without any hesstation, that it would be better to meet him, in order to put an end	I
to his hopes, than, by avoiding him, leave him	i
to form what conjedures he pleafed upon my Sentiments, with regard to what had pafTed betwixt us. I therefore refol'ved to go to the re/z-dezvous the next morning.	i
Thus, with much Seeming eafe, I had determined todifcard, forever, the man I loved;
I deceived myfelf; tho’, I dare fay, I don’t you, my dtzv Adelaide. The thought of feeing him again at my feet, and of hearing him vow an everlasting love, were the latent motives for my acquiefcenee with his request; though they ' were veiled under the pretext, of taking the earliest opportunity of putting an end to an af- I fair, which, with honor, I could no longer fuf- ' fer the continuance of. Being now perfedlly Satisfied with my own conduct, I ssept quietly, and rofe the fame. I have frequently obferved, that when two oppoSite ideas, equally interesting, are imprest upon the mind at the fame time, it rests, as it were, lufpended betwixt them,
and
Mrs. W I L L I a ms.	69
and consequently feels neither, forcibly ; whereas, either of them Separately, might, perhaps, be capable of cauSing the most violent agitation ; this, I apprehend, (having been my Situation,) was the cauSe of the extreme compoSure with which I walked towards the Summer-houSe, to meet Mr. Williams ; where I found him waiting for me. He appeared more calm than he had done the day before, and much more dejected. He began, by exprelTing his SenSibiiity of my condeScenSion, in thus having Cixnplied with his request; he then deScanted much upon the impostibility of a delicate mind’s finding its felicity in a union of hands, to which the heart Subscribed with reluctance : He Said he looked upon matrimony to be a very Solemn, Sacred ceremony, and that he was much Surprized how any dared to Swear everlasting love to another, when, at the fame time, they knew, in their conlciences, that the utmost in their power to giv'^e, was friendship and esteem :	“ But (con-
tinued he) how barbarous ! how unjust ! nay, how void of Sentiment must that perSon be, who, in return for the warmest, the tenderest pastion, Should uSe deceit, and bring to their enraptured lover’s arms nothing but a Small portion of esteem, and an invincible lund of cool indifference.” Here he paufed, and looked full upon me. I knew the piduro, and trembled when I threw my eyes over it ; I fighed, and anSwered, “ By what means. Sir, you have read my fecret thoughts, I know not; I will not pretend todifavowthe invincible coolneSs of my heart towards Sir Charles Stanly; I confefs 1 could never teach it to love him ; but it honors, values, and esteems him above all his Sex ;
and
70 The M E M O I R S o f
and I hope that duty, reaSon, and time, will infpire the rest: I am convinced, that any woman must find her Felicity in being united to So valuable a charadier as his is. My infenfibility of his perfonal merit, is a fatality which I can noway account for, and which I would laydown my life to conquer. Thus, Sir, I have made my confelSion to you ; but must, at the fame time, honestly declare, that though I cannot force my heart to be in love with the obje(9: my reafon admires, yet I really never Saw the man, whom I thought worthy to be his rival.” Here I ceafed. Mr. Williams Seized my hand, faying, “ Well, lovely Charlottey I must do juf-tice to Sir Charlefs merit, by acknowledging, that I know no man who is more worthy of you than he; and, though I am doomed to be wretched for life, I most Sincerely wisti you happy in each other ; but forgive me if I doubt of that’s being the cafe. His excels of fondnefs, will ever be a reproach to you for your coldnefs, whilst that coldnefs will be a perpetual dagger to his heart. Believe me, my dear Mifs Rutland, Love Seldom takes its birth from esteem ; it is too reafoned, too cold a Sentiment, for it ever to fpring from ; even Hate is a more favourable foil; and it has been Sometimes known to have produced its contrary. You may fup-poSe that I argue thus from an interested motive,
.but I give you my word of honor, that I prefer j .your happinefs to my own; and if I really thought that you would be happy in marrying	|
Sir Charles, I stiould find Some conSolation from your felicity ; but I fee you falling a Sacrifice to Sentiments, which, though noble, are yet fallacious, and to which you will infallibly die a i
martyr.	j
Mrs. W I L L I AMS.	71
•mnrtyr. Your heart was formed to love with vivacity ; its delicate fenfihility will furnilh an eternal Source of mifery, unlefs you are united to the man you love, with tendernefs, and are -beloved by, with rapture.” Here he Sighed, and I perceived a tear steal from his eye. I was moved. He continued:	MiSs Kutlandy as
your felicity is the ardent wilh of my heart, I take the liberty of talking to you as a siriend ; it is a title 1 afpire to beyond any earthly one, excepting that of your hufband; I beg, therefore, on my knees, that you would honor me with your friendstiip ; command my life, my fortune, they are both yours, and rest assured, that I will never more trouble you with a hopelefs passion. My viSit to Lady has been of a Sufficient length, I thereforepurpofe leaving this place tomorrow, and returning to my friend^s houfe. I shall not quit the country till you do. So shall hope for the pleafure of Seeing you frequently in that Space of time : In town we shall meet, perhaps, fometimes! and if any unforefeen accident should happen to break off your intended nuptials, may I hope, dW\r\& Charlotte, that you will then Suffer me to make my addresses to you?” i replied, “ You do me honor. Sir, but you talk of impossibilities.” I then obferv-ed, “ That our conversation had already been of a conssderable length, and, for that reafon, ; propofed our returning to the houfe.” He Said, “ I obey; but dear, lovely girl, fay that you accept of me as a friend, and as Such, promife to confide in me.” I anfwered, precipitately, “ Ido—I will”—He kissed my hand, and we Separated. The next day he took his leave of tis.
Nothing
72 Th E M E M O I R S o F
Nothing very material happened during the rest of the time which I past with Lady Betty^ excepting that at two or three balls, given by the neighbouring Gentry, I generally danced with Mr. Williams.y whole attentive, affe6tionate behaviour increafed my love of him, almost every hour. He never mentioned his passion to me, but his every look, and a6tion, Spoke the excefs of it. I grew thoughtful and melancholy, and the more So, as the time approached when Lady Betty w’as to carry me home. It came, and we arrived, without any accident, at my uncle’s, w’here I found Sir Charles. He appeared in raptures at the Sight of me. I did all I could in order to Seem glad to fee them j but I fear I acted my part very aukwardiy. My heart heaved with inward anguifh, and timsiured all my looks and a6tions with an air of melancholy. They, iiowever, attributed this to the concern I felt, on being Separated from Lady Betty Ruf-fely who stayed with us but three days, and then returned to her own feat in the countiy. I did, indeed, part with her with regret, as she was a most amiable, fenSible, worthy woman, and had shewn a fondnefs and tendernefs for me, which claimed my utmost gratitude and refpe<5l; V/e wept reciprocally on parting, and she made Sir Charles promife, that the Summer following he and I should Spend Some months with her. Soon after she was gone, I went to my father’s, as did my uncle, aunt, and ?i\v Charles : During our stay there, the time was fpent in every one’s bufying themfelves with, and talking of, my approaching wedding. My father and mother increafed the torment this topick gave me, by the first eternally giving me lectures upon the
duties
Mrs. WILLIAMS.	73
duties of a wife, a mother, a friend, and a mif-trefs; and the latter, by teazing me to death about the choice of my cloaths, and the rest of my finery. Sir Charles., it it true, behaved with the utmost tendernefs and refpe6l to me ; but I fancied I Saw an air of triumph and protection, in his countenance, which rendered him detestable to me, and at the fame time, harrowed up my heart. Thus I was wretched, but they were all too bufy to take any notice of it. When they perceived that I was graver thanufual, they attributed it to a decent referve, which was becoming in my prefent filiation ; and mistook for Modesty, what was, indeed, Delpair. Sophie^ my dear Sophie alone, read my heart; She was now grown a great girl ; but as my griefs were of a nature not to admit of relief, I had never made any one my confident. Sophie guested that I did not love Sir Charles, but her conjectures went no farther. One night, as I was going to-bed, and stie was Sitting by me, stie faid, in a pathetic tone of voice, “ My dear Sister, I am much deceived if your heart don’t fuffer extremely ; I fee you strive to hide it, but the eye of friendihip is penetrating : I am perfuaded that you don’t love Sir Charles Stanly, and from thence Springs all your uneaSinefs. Alas! (continued She, with a deep Sigh,) how capricious is •fortune I Why don’t you fee him with my eyes? and then you would both be happy.” I looked at her, and Saw her face covered with blufhes, and the tear falling on her cheek. I instafttly guested that fhe was in love with him herfelf, but did not think it prudent to let her fee I had made Such a difcovery. I therefore anfwercd, “ Indeed, my dear Sophie^ I would marry no V o L. I.	E	man
74 The MEMOIRS of man whom I had not the highest regard and ef-teem for ; and as to love, it is a Sentiment which girls of our age Should never boast of; I am grave, my Dear, becaufe matrimony is a very Serious fubjecf, but I am not melancholy.'*
So faying, I pretended to be steepy ; She wilhed me a good night, and went to her own room. When I was alone, I reflected, with astonishment, on what I had just heard and Seen ; a multitude of new ideas crouded upon my imagination, all of which contributed to perplex and pain me. I afked myfelf if I was not fufficiently wretched, by being obliged to marry a man I did not love, but that, by Sacrificing myfelf, I must plunge a dagger into the breast of my fweet Sophie ? “ Good God, I exclaimed, change Sir	heart! Turn his affections on my
Sister ; let them be happy, no matter what becomes of me!” Thus I tormented myfelf till, overcome by grief and vexation, I dropped to steep. The next day I obferved Sophie more narrowly than I had hitherto ever done; I could now eafily perceive the fenSibdity ot her heart painted in her eyes, whenever she looked at S>\v Charles 1, her attention to all his words and aSbons: In short, her love of him was fo vist-ble, that I wondered how I came not to have Seen it before; the reafon was, however, obvious, as my inattention to every thing, but my perfonal distike of him, blinded me to the ef-fe61:s his merit might have upon another. I had without refle<5fion, concluded, that as I did not admire him, nobody elfe could.
As the time approached for our going to London, Sophie became melancholy; she lost her appetite, and grew thin; My heart bled for
her,
j
I
Mrs. WILLIAMS.	75
her, and I Sometimes reSolved to break off the match, though I Ihould difoblige my parents and all my family by it, rather than render my-felf and Sifter miserable for life, by obeying their commands; but I had not courage enough to undertake, alone, So arduous a talk. I wished for Mr, Williams to counfel me in this delemma he was, indeed, a most improper pcrfon, but then he was the only one who knew the real ss-tuation of my heart.
I muft have tired you, my dear Adelaide, by the prolix, circumftantia! manner, in which I have narrated the various Springs, and incidents, which led me to tint period ol my life, from whence I date all the future misfortunes of it. Remember, that I am not writing a novel, but, on the contrary, truth guides my pen, and commands me to lay my boSorn bare to the eyes of my friend, who withes to know, from my Self, the story of my life. It will prefently want your partial indulgence, in order to apologize* for the abfurdity and indistretion of a rash a6lion, which, I fear, admits of no excufe. But, not to interrupt the thread of my history any longer, I muft tell you, that the month of Obiober was already arrived, and my uncle Boldby ed very destrous of going to London. 1 need not inform you, I prefume, that his nepht, w’s impatience to be there, was his motive for being in Such a hurry. In confequence, therefore, of his intreaties for the fpeedy concluSum of our marriage, my father fixed the week following for our departure from—Eire. He had hired a ready furnished houfe for himfelf and family, in Wejiminjler. It was agreed, that I should be at my uncle's, as ufual till I was married. On the E 2	'	ds-Y
76 TheMEMOIRSof day appointed we fat out, Mr. and M-Xh. Boldbyy Sir C&dir/f’j, and myfelf, in their coach; my father, mother, Sophie^ and my mother’s maid, in my father’s coach and my aunt’s and mine, with two other female Servants, in Sir Charles'’^. On our arrival at London we parted for that night; my father went loWeJhninfier, and we to Mr. Boldby*s. The next morning I rofe early, and went to my father’s, in order to enquire how they all did after their journey; when in crolTingthe Parky it was my ill fate to meet with ^Ax. Willi amt'. he was walking a stow pace, with his arms folded, and his eyes fixed on the ground ; he did not perceive me till I was clofe to him ; when, raifing his eyes, he Seemed to be vastly Surprized, as well pleaSed, at meeting me thus unexpe6IedJy. I was astonifhed to iee him So altered ; he looked pale, thin, and dejected ; I could not help telling him, that I thought he was much changed, and I alked him “ If he had not been well He replied. That he had never known either peace or health Since I ielt Lady BettK^y and added, with a Sigh, that he thanked God, his Sorrows would probably Soon be at an end, as he was fenSible that his health declined daily, and, consequently, would Soon lead him to peace in the grave.” I was SenSibly affedted, both by his sigure and conversation ; and anSwered him. That I hoped he was a falfe Prophet ; adding that I begged he would live for my Sake, as he w^as the only friend I had, in whom I could confide, and that I had much to Say to him, and wanted his advice.” Without waiting for his anSwer, I told him where I was going, and that I Should return through the Parky in leSs than an hour, where, if he would stay for me,
I would
Mrs. williams.	77
I would rejoin him, and renew our conversation. He bowed assent, and I went on to my fathers. On my return from my parents, whom I found well, and in high Spirits, especially my mother, who was delighted to be in London.^ I met Mr. Williams on the very Spot I had left him. I immediately began to relate to him every thing which had pasted fince our Separation. I expol-ed the real sstuation of my heart with regard to Sir Charles, and then begged him to advife me, as a friend, how to a6t. He listened tome with great attention, and then Said, “ He was per-fetily convinced, that it would be impostible for' me ever to be happy if I married Sir Charles, and that there was no way of avoiding it, but by making another choice ; that Such a (lep would undoubtedly make a great noife at the first, but that upon refle£Iion, and a thorough information of all the particulars, (wliich had led me to the taking ol it) he was perl'uaded, that it wouhl be impostible that any reafonable being Should contemn me ; nay, that Sir Charles himfelf as being a man of fenfe, would, in time, be brought to own, that it would have been more ungenerous in me to have given my hand, unaccompanied by my heart, than to deprive him of them both, in order to make myfelf happy, as well as to prevent his being miferable.” He then told me, That he was heir to five thoufand pounds a year; that he was an only child ; he confessed that his father was covetous j yet, when the thing is done, I am perfuaded he will Soon be reconciled ; and as to my mother, fhe will be hajipy, I know, in feeing me fo. Come then, my beloved Charlotte, take your refolution, I am ready to run all rifques with you, and if you E 3	have
78 The MEMOIRS of
have the fmallest fpark of affeflion for me, you will not heSitate to follow my example. Con-fent, my amiable girl, to make me the happiest of my Sex, and it fhall be the study of my future life, to make you the contentedest of yours.” I started at this propofal, and replied, “ I never can refolve to run away from my parents, though I forefee that it is the only remedy for the evils which threaten me ; if I could get their confent, I would give my hand to you, Sooner than to any other man in the univerfe ; but that can never be, nor durst I even alk it of them ; So ceafe to prefs me upon a fubjedf, to which I can never tonfent.” He continued, however, to ufe every argument his imagination could fuggest, in order to stew me the necestty there was tor following his advice, till, in stort, it was high time for me to return home. I took his dire£lion down in my pocket-book, and promifed him, that he stould hear from me on any emergency. He replied, “ I hope the first letter you honor me with, will contain a permiston to lead you to May-fairV I stock my head, and bid him adieu.
On my return to my uncle’s, I found him, and Sir Charles, in the parlour, with two lawyers ; on Sight of them, I was going to retire, when Mr. Bolclby called me back, faying.
You, my Dear, are fo principal \?l party in the affairs now before us, that your prefence is even necessary ; fo sit down, and hear your marriage lettlements read,^’ 1 was obliged to obey; but, good God! what a jargon is that which the lawyers ufe! how indelicate ! how tedious! I was ready to expire with confusion and ennuie before they had read them half through. No
Sooner
Mrs. williams.	79
Sooner was lists Scene over, than I was told, there was a jeweller come to receive my orders, hov/ I would have Sir Charles's late mother’s jewels Set; he had likewife brought Some very hand-fome ones, which my lover had befpcke ol him, and which he now', with an air of intfiuble ten-deinefs, prefented me with. 1 was obliged to accept them, though I did So with the most vi-Sible reluctance. He perceived it, and Said, My angel, I am ienSible that your beauty will receive no addition from thefe ornaments; they will borrow' their lustre from it; but we must, you know, conform to custom; and I Sincerely wi(h, they were more worthy of your acceptance.” I replied, “ They are vastly more fo. Sir Charles, than 1 either deSire, or deferve ; and 1 am instnitcly obliged to you for them,” Ah ! CbarhtteE he exclaimed, “ how coldly was that Said ! I ihould t! ]nk the w'orld, if I was master of it, too little to lay at your feet; the postelSion of you, is above all price; But I own to you, Charlotte, that, lovely and beloved as you are, yet I (liouid be the most miserable wretch on earth, though your hufband, if I did nor, w'ith your hand, receive that invaluable treafure, your heart.” Here my aunt approached us, and interrupted our conversation, which, l.owever, funk deep into my mind. I Saw by it, that, even in charity to Charles, as well as to myfelf, I ought not to marry him. This reflection confirmed me in the necessity there w'as for running away with Mr. Williams : I had much rathei not have been married, at that time, to either of them; but I wanted a protector, to Stand between me, and my enraged relations. This point fettled, the next thing E 4	was
8o The- MEMOIRS of' was, to confider of the means how to get away unobserved. My father was to buy my wedding garments, So I determined to stay till they were made, that, at least, I might not be obliged to my hiilband for cloathing me., I found, that I fhould never be able to execute this important Scheme, without a confidant and assistant ; for this purpofe, none were So proper as either my Sister, or my own maid ; I choSe the former, and, in fo doing, I judged wifely ; for of all weakneffes, there is none greater than that of putting one^s felt into the power of a Servant ; the narrownefs of their education confines their ipinds, and that of their circumstances corrupts their manners; for which reafons, the moment they are trusted, they never fail of becoming our tyrants, and most commonly betray us; nay, always, if it is their interest fo to do. ^
I took an opportunity, one evening, when Sophie and I were alone, to inveigh bitterly against the cruelty of my fate, which compelled me to marry a man whom I could not love, and for whom I had even an averSion as a huf-band. “ Indeed, Sophie^ faid I, I am fome-times tempted to run away, rather than to precipitate myfelf into certain mifery, by marrying S>\T Charles A She anfvvered me, with the tears streaming dowm her cheeks, My dear Sister, I would lay down my life to Serve you, but I fee no means of extricating yourfelf out of your prefent difficulties; the affair is too tar advanced ; unlefs, indeed, you was to run away, and that is'a dreadful expedient: However, command me ; if I can contribute to your relief, nothing is impofTiileto my friendfhip.” I took her in my arms, and thanked her with an ecstasy
M R s. W I L L I A M S.
cy of gratitude: I then laid open to her the Scheme I had formed, of quitting my uncle’s houfe : I begged fhe would confent to go along with me, at least for a few days. She started at this proposition ; but, after a fhort paute, fhe Said, “ Yes, Charlotte.^ I will Ihare your fate with you, be it what it may ; but how Shall we get our cloaths out of the houfes ? and where to?” I am not at a lofs,” I replied, “ for a place to convey them to ; but how to get them from hence, I own puzzles me.” Sophie Said, “ We must trust the mantua maker, who is . going continually backwards and forwards with bundles, and therefore will not be fufpetled.”’
I begged of her to go to the woman the next day, and to found her a little, and fee if fhe might be bribed ; fhe did Sc, and found her willing. Sophie and I now began Seriousty to fettle our plan of operation. Sophie afked me, “ Where we w^ere to go to ?” I told her, “ That I would inform her on that head in time ; but begged her to rest affured, that I would do nothing which might either injure her reputation, or my own.” Site replied, “That She was perfectly convinced of it, and therefore Should trouble me with no more questions.” That night, I wrote a letter to yix.Williams.i informing him, “ that I deSired he would take a lodging for us; and alfo, that he would fend his Servant to Mrs. Shapes, the mantua-maker, for Some bundles, which ssie would deliver to . him, and which I would have immediately conveyed to our destined lodgings; I added, that unlefs Some unforefeen accident happened to prevent me, I purpofed, on that day fe’nnight, being, at ten o’clock in the morning, in the E 5	Park,
Bi The MEMOIRS of
Parkf near Buckingham-houfe, where I should cxpefl: to meet him, and defired a coach might be ready to carry us Immediately to May-fair ; and that he would engage Some friend of his, in whom he could confide, to be of the party, in order to give me away, as well as to be a wit-ueSsof our marriage. This extraordinary letter my lover was prepared for receiving, by many preceding ones, which had passed between us, lince our meeting in the Park^ as well as from Some short converfations which we had contrived to have together, at different times. After having fent the above letter to the post, I fet about packing up my cloaths in fmall parcels, which were conveyed away by degrees, with eaSe enough, as the mantua-maker found many pretences for fending her girls to me, and for frequently coming herfeif ; the Servants weie So accustomed to fee them pafs backwaids and forwards, that they never took notice of them ; and my uncle and aunt’s dresting-rooms looked into the Parky So they knew nothing of what was doing in the front of the houfe. Sophie got berthings away pretty much in the lame manner. I must, however, defire you to remark, that 1 left the jewels, trinkets, &'c. which Sir Charles had given me. Sealed up, and diiedl-ed to him, in a drawer in my room.
On the day appointed for our . flight, Sophie, as had been agreed betwixt us, came early in | the morning to my uncle’s, and laid, on enter- ' ing my room, “ I am come,	to fetch
you to Spend the day at my father’s : You pro-miftd US one day before you married, and we have fixed upon this.” ,I anfwered, It was very well, I confented with all my heartThen
turning j 1
Mrs. W I.D LSA M S.	83
turning to my maid, I Said, “ Fanny, do you make niy reSpeftful compliments to my uncle and aunt, tell them where I am gone, and beg they won’t expe61 me till after Supper; and if Sir Charles afks forme, tell him, I request that he would not follow me. Sophie had told my father and mother, that stie was coming to Spend the day with me at my uncle’s, and begged they would not come to interrupt us. They promifed to comply with her request the more readily, as it would, probably, be the last day that we Snould Spend together, before I was metamor-phofed into my Lady Stanly. Thus the old folks feemed pretty Secure from fufpe£Iing our elopement till evening. Every thing now being iniirely fettled, with an aching heart and an unsteady step, I 'eantupon Sophie’s arm, and Set out for the Park. As my father’s houfe was within the lenglitof a street of my uncle’s, my Sifter and! Seldom took a Servant with us, unlels in the evening, which made our going out alone that morning appear no way extraordinary.
When we arrived in the	we found Mr.
Williams waiting for UP, as alfoa young Gentleman, of an agreeable appearance, whom I did not know. I never Saw joy and fatisfadVion So strongly painted in a countenance as they were in that of my lover’s; he feemed lost in tranfport, and in a moment, hurried us into a coach, which waited for us, and away we drove to May-fair^ v/here, tremulous, pale, and dejeffed, I pronounced that fatal Tes, which binds us for life.
I took a certificate of my marriage. Signed by all the parties, and then the coach was ordered to carry us to our lodgings; which were genteely and pleafantly situated. Sophie’s astonishment
cannot	I
84 T H E Ivl E M O I R S o F cannot be defcribed, when she found that I was going to be married to a man she had never either Seen or heard mentioned ; she pulled me by the sseeve, as the Parfon was going to begin the ceremony, and whifpered in my ear, ‘‘dear sister, has he a fortune to maintain you ? Do you know him well ?” I anfwered, “ My good girl, fet your heart at eafe, I know what I am about.” Alas, Ithought I did! But how wide was I from the mark I V/e breakfasted at our lodgings, after which Mr. Williams propofed our going to dine at Richmond, and returning in the evening : This I found had been a Scheme concerted between him and his friend ; for upon looking out of the window, I faw a handfome coach and six at the door, with two livery Servants on horfeback. Mr. Williams told me,
“ That it was his friend’s equipage, who had been fo obliging as to offer me the ufe of it till I got one of my own.” I bow,ed, and expressed my thanks to the Gentleman for his civility.
We then all got into the coach : Our beaus	j
tried every means to make this little excursion	|
agreeable to us, by the most lively and enter- | taining conversation ; they had really, both of ! them, a great share of wit and humour ; Sophie often laughed heartily ; but my Spirits were too much agitated to Suffer me to partake of their mirth. The attentive manner in which Mr. Williams carefully avoided faying any thing which, even in the most distant manner, could w’ound my delicacy, endeared him to me. I think 1 never Saw any body fo handfome as he appeared to me to be that day ; it will not be mal-a-propos if I here beg leave to introduce his perfon to your acquaintance.
He
Mrs. WILLIAMS.
He was five feet (en inches high, perfectly well made, and exqiiifitely genfcel, (as I believe I have already faid ;) his eyes were large and almost black; his hair and eye-brows of the darkest lhade in brown, the latter arched, as if drawn by apencil ; his nofe well made, and a littleaqui-line ; his mouth remarkably handfome, with the finestfet of teeth I ever Saw ; his complexion was clear brown, with a florid colour in his cheeks; the Shape of his face was oval ; his Smile was inexprestibly fw^eet; but when he laughed heartily, I always thought he looked Silly.
Before we left Richmond \ called tor pen, ink, and paper, thinking it necesthry to write a line to my uncle and aunt, in order to prevent their imagining that Some terrible accident had fiap-pened to us, upon my not returning home in the evening ; I begged my Sister would do the lame to my father; In which letters we only deSired them not to be uneafy on our account, affuring them that w'e were both well and Safe ; adding, that the next day they flaould hear farther from us, when they Should be informed of the rea-fons which had induced us to abfent ourfelves from them. Thefe notes, on our return to town, we Sent by two common porters, hired by a Servant, a mile from our lodgings, who could give no account from whom, or whence, he brought them. The next morning, I fat myfelf Serioufly down to make my apology, and to plead my caufe, to my father, mother, uncle, aunt, and poor Sir Charles, for whom my heart bled : To my parents I only faid, “ That, as in the marriage they had propofed for me, I prefumed they could only have in view my hap. pinefs, it was now compleat, from my having
married
85 Th E M E M O I R S o F
married the only man on earth who could have made me So ; that an invincible averSion to Sir Charles Stanly^ as a hiilband, had compelled me to take this irregular step ; that nothing lefs than the certainty of being miferable for life, could have made me difobey them ; that I would have flung myfelf at their feet, to have implored their pity ; but that, from a thorough knowledge of my father’s steadinefs, in whatever he had once proje£led, as well as from a converfation I had had with him upon the fubjeff, I judged hinrv implacable on that head ; and, therefore against my inclination, I had been forced to fling myfelf into the arms of Mr. Williamsy who had long loved me, and who was a Gentleman of worth and fortune ; I assured them, ihax Sophie was in no manner accessary to my marriage, which I proved, by narrating faithfully all that had paff-ed between her and me, before our elopement:
I then implored their forgivenefs, and humbly intreated their permilfion, for my hulhand and Self to throw ourfelves at their feet, to receive their blessing.” This letter was. direfled to my father, but addrefSed to all the family.
My next tassc was, to write to Sir Charles,
I related to hint faithfully the struggles 1 had had with mylelf on his account. I told him, that, in triendstiip, nay, injustice to his nte-rit, I could not give him my hand without my heart, as he had declared, that, by So doing, 1 Should make him the most miferable Ol men : I j fatd every thing that esteem, and the highest fen-Sibility of his worth, could diQate: I implored his forgivenefs, and even ventured to afk his friendship and pity : I intreated him rather to try to alleviate, than irretate, my relations anger
against
Mrs. W I L L I A M S. S7 against me. I then hinted, that the violent paf-fion a friend of mine had conceived for him, had greatly contributed to my taking the refolution ot running away. I ended, with the strongest assurances of my everlasting esteem, and admiration of his virtues.'’
This difficult talk over, I Sent the letters by my Servant, with orders to inform them, it alked, where we lived. I expelled, that the first mark they would give me ot their diSpleafure, would be the takingfrom me; and fo they did, the next day, to my inexpressible grief.
My hufband, I found, hadTeen writing to his parents, but I did not fee his ktlers: I'liis hurry over, I looked at Mr. Williams^ and, in that moment, a thoufaiid dreadful ideas ruSlied into my mind, which had never prefented them-felves to my im.sgination before, and 1 burst into a stood ot tears; he stew to me, and, with the utmost tendernefs, pressing me to his bofom. Said, “ My dear, my lovely wife, trom whence can stow thefe tears.? Have I been So wretched * as to have cauled them, by inadvertently offending you ?” “ No, no, my dear Mr. Williams,
I replied, you are every thing my heart can wilh, but I fear we have ruined one another ; if our friends are not reconciled, what is to become of us.?”	“ My angel, (laid he,} why
forefee misfortunes which may never happen ? I will anfwer for my parents; they have but to fee my Charlotte, and they must own, (he was irrelistable. Come take courage, my dear girl, your fears are imaginary ; I know my father, and I am Sure he will, after a few formalities, be reconciled.” T his assurance calmed my fears a little, yet, still, my heart heaved with terror
and
88 The MEMOIRS of
and doubt. The next morning brought an ab-folute order iov Sophie to return home immediately, and a defence tome, ever to approach my parents more, as they difclaimed any kindred with fo infamous a girl. Thefewere their words, wrote upon a card, by my father. My aunt’s was a letter, and couched in civiler terms, though much to the fame effedi, only fhe added, that my punilhment, flie was afraid, would, in the end, be even more than adequate to my crime ; for fhe knew the man I had married, and that he was a libertine, and vastly in debt; but his fine figure, and artful tongue, had, (fhe fuppofed) turned my brain ; fhe pitied me ; but Said, “ I had made my own bed, and must now lay in it with as much eafe as I could; that, for her part, the was refolved never to fee me more.”
T hus abandoned by all my friends, my hufband was the only fupport I had now in life, and he, my aunt Said, was a libertine. “ Good God ! I I exclaimed, (in my own mind) if that’s true, what a wretch am I 1’* He read thefe letters, and, when he came to that part of my aunt’s, which fpoke fo difrefpefilfully of himfelf, he Smiled, and, taking hold of my hand. Said, “ My dear Charlotte^ I fancy Mrs. Bolclby has forgot the old adage, Fhat a reformed rake makes the beji hufband ; and, as to my debts, (if I have i any) they are my fathei’s affair, not mine ; he is my steward, and, by that means, Saves me the trouble of paying my bills myfelf.” The light manner with which Mr. Williams treated thefe two important charges laid against him, both fur-prized and grieved me. I was abforbed in a chain of the most diSagieeable reflexions, when a Servant brought me a letter, which I knew,
from
M R s. W 1 L L I A M S.	8g
from the Superscription, to be from Sir Charles Stanly. He began, by inveighing against the cruelty of his destiny, in not having endowed him with merit Sufficient to have engaged my j ' affe<5Iions: He assured me, “ that my happinefs was tne most ardent wiffi of his heart, and that, if I have really found it, in my union with Mr. Williams, he cannot be absolutely wretched; that the lofs of me, he knows to be irreparable, and, therefore, his futute life must be a blank ; he hopes, however, from time, and a thorough convi61ion of my felicity’s being permanent, to become more reconciled to the Severity of his fate; he adds, that he Shall Set out on a tour through Europe, in a few days ; and ends, with assuring me, of his everlasting refpe£t and ef-leem.” In a postscript, he fays, “ That he shall, in obedience to my commands, wait upon my friends, and ufe his utmost endeavours to prevail on them to fee me; but, should he be fo unhappy as not to Succeed, he begs I would not attribute his ill fucceSs to his want of zeal in my Service ; then, with a thoufand wishes, and prayer, ior my future happinefs, he bids me adieu.”
I was prodigioussy affe61;ed at the generous manner in which Sir Charles acSted on this occasion ; had he upbraided me with my deceit and ingratitude, I believe I Should not have been fen-sible to his reproaches ; but the calm, noble dignity, with which his letter was wrote, made him rife in my elleem, as I funk in my own ; and I never remember having Seen myfelf in a more humiliating point of view, than 1 did, upon drawing a parrallel betv\ei.n him and mylelsi I gave Mr. Williams the letter; he read it ;
then,
I
90 TheMEMOIRSof	j
then, throwing it carelelly upon the table, Said “ S>\x Charles is.a noble Seilou , and I wisti him 1 a good journey, with all my heart.”	|
The hurry of a Scene So new, and So emhar-rafling as that which I had been in ever | Since my marriage, had Scarcely left me a moment for rede6iion ; but the first time Mr. , IVilUams took his hat, and Said lie would go to the Coffee-houfe for half an hour, gave me to inySelf. What a chaos of remorfe, trouble, and vexation, prefented itfelf to my view ; I trembled at the profpeft, and, once more, called ReaSon to my aid ; file came, but to upbraid me for having difcarded her at Lady Betty RuP JefSf from which fatal moment, fhe convinced me, that I had gone Straight on, in the paths of Phror, which lead infallibly to Misfortune.. The hint my aunt had given me, of my hulhand’s charadter, made me carefully examine his every word and a6lion. I Soon found his education to have been that of a modern fine Gentleman, differing, however, from most of them in this, that he really was a good Scholar, and had many accomplifhments; he drew remarkably well, and played upon the harpfichord as well as any one could do, whodid not make it the occupation of their lives; he Spoke Italian and French fluently, and was, in every refpeff, what the world calls, an accomplistied Gentleman; He ' would undoubtedly have been alfo a valuable member of Society, had he not been Spoiled by the faife maxims of the company he kept. Youngas I was, 1 had been taught early to think as I have already fhewn, in the former part of my story ; I therefore foon perceived the danger of being united to a man, who had no fixed
principles,
Mrs. W I L L I A M S.	91
principles, but a few romantic ones, which were quite foreign to domestic happinefs; Such as, a high Senfe of honour, which was confined to the paying, with the utmost exacinefs, his phty-debts} as alfo, a thorough convifiion of the necessity of drawing his fword, whenever called upon fo to do, without examining cither by whom, or for what. He valued himfclf upon understanding the chances at JVhite'*s^ as well as any man there, and boasted, that lie had never been taken in, but once, at Newmarket, He never fpoilt company by fiincbing, (as he called it) though he did not love drinking; or ever objefled to a girl, if ssic was introduced where he was. This was his catechifm. Whilst I was absorbed, in thus defining my hulband’s cl)ara6ter, alervant opened my dressing-room door, and Said, “ Madam, here is a Lady de-fires tofpeak with you.” I anfwered, “ Shew her up.” He did lo; and, to my great furprize, inUoduced to me a tall, ill-looking woman, whom, in my life, I had never Seen before; Ihe had good cloathson, but, as I thought, strangely fancied, and as oddly put on. I afked her, “ It stie had any bufinefs with me ?” She anfwered, Seating herlelf, “ Yes, Mifs, I am come to talk with you upon an affair of confe-quence.” The word Mifs, did not Shock my ear in the least, as I had io lately cast it off, that I hardly perceived the impropriety of it. She continued, ** You are to know, Mifs, that before Mr. Williams took you, he kept Fanny Fetch, but I fuppofc, you know tiiat well enough.) Now', you arc to know, that he has left this poor creature, without paying her lodgings, or giving her a farthing ; all her cloaths
are
g% TheMEMOIRSof are in pawn, and She must go into lirpbo, if he does not relieve her. Now, to be Sure, Mifs, you are not obliged to do any thing for her; but I would have you confider, that it may be your own cafe, in a (hort time ; for, I must tell you, that your Spark is not famous for his constancy ; and, though you are pretty, yet I have recommended Some girls, as pretty as yourfelf, to him, and poor things I do not know what is become of them.” During this conversation, the blood had Several times alternately flown Irom my face to myheart ; and the perturbation of my mind was fo great, that it was with the utmost difficulty I collected my Spirits to anfwer the woman; which I did, however at laSt, in the following words: “ I do not think. Madam, that you mean to infult me, but will fuppoie that your prefent treatment of me, proceeds from your ignorance of my being Mr. Williamses wife.’’ She interrupted me. Smiling, “ Yes, yes, my Dear, (fays She) I dare fay you are ; as all young Ladies call themfelves the wives of their first keeper.” This anfwer fired me, and brought a blufh of indignation into my cheeks I replied, “ Unhappy woman, you have lived absorbed in vice So long, that you even don’t know virtue, though (he stands before your eyes; I will, however, condefcend to undeceive you, by intorming you, that I am the daughter of Mr. Rutland^ Member of Parliament for the
county of -------, and that I was married last
week to Mr. Williams^ at May-fair Chapel, w here you may, if you chufe it, find the marriage registered, In the mean timo, I pity, from my heart, the unfortunate girl whom yon recommend to my charity ; give me her direction,
Mrs. williams.	93
tion, (then drawing my piirfe out ol my pocket, I Said,) and here, give her thefe ten guineas; they are all lean Spare at prefent; but when I am reconciled to my friends, which (I added with a Sigh) I hope will be Soon, if fhe deServes it, from her future good conduSf, I will Secure her from want the reft of her days.’^ Here I ended, and a tear involuntarily dropped from my eye. The woman was by this time convinced of her miftake, and began to make Some aukward excuSes for her ill behaviour. I assured her, there was no occaSion for them, and that I was not in the leaft affronted. She expressed a high fenSe of my goodnefs and benevolence, and, with much more refpedi than fhe had entered it, left the room. A few minutes after file was gone, Mr. Williams came home, and brought with him a Gentleman whom I did not know. On presenting him to me, he Said, “ This Gentleman, my Dear, is an intimate acquaintance of my father’s ; he has the goodnefs to offer himSell as a mediator betwixt him and me,” Mr. Smith, for that was his name, advanced towards me, and wissied me joy. I expressed to him the SenSibility I had of his be-’ ncvoience, and my gratitude for his kind intention to Serve us, and, with a forced Smile, (for my heart was ready to burst) I added, “ By So good an aQ, Sir, you will inSure to yourStlf the kingdom of Heaven, for you know it is pro-miled to the peace-makers.” He anSwered me very politely, “ That he deSired no greater reward than that of contributing to my happineSs: But indeed. Madam, (continued he) I apprehend that I ssiall have very little merit in this affair, for I forefee that the old folks, instead of
being
94 The MEMOIRS of
being angry at their Son’s choice, will think it the wifest a£Iion of his life, when they come to know you.” I bowed to this compliment, and he went on. “ But, Madam, is there no means of bringing your friends to a right way of thinking ^ I apprehend there lays the hardest talk.
I know your uncle Boldby intimately well ; and when I have done withyswr old Gentry, (Said he looking at my hufband) I will, with that Lady’s permission, attack him.” I replied, “ That words were but weak interpreters of a feeling , heart, and that I could find none toexprefs my fenfibility of his extreme goodnefs ” Mr Smith changed the difcourfe, and Mr. Williams ob-ferved, “ That I was graver than ufual.” I told him, “ The preceding conversation had made me thoughtful, but that I would endeavour to be more chearfiil.” He replied, “ I beg you would, Charlotte^ for the least gloom on that lovely face of your’s makes me miserable.” After dinner the two Gentlemen got in- i to a Serious confultation upon the manner in which they were to bring old Mr. Williams to fee us; I took thisoppertunity of leaving them and retired into my dressing room, in order to determine with mySelf, how I stiould a6t, with regard to the Scene which had past between me, and that strange woman, in the morning ; I thought it would be indelicate to mention it to my hufband, as well as injudicious, becaule we Seldom forgive, and never love a perfon, who ihews us ourfelves in a disadvantageous light. I defire Adelaide, you would take notice, that this observation was made at the period of time 1 am now writing of; experience has fincetaught me, that though it may be Sound just in many
instances.
Mrs. williams.	95
instances, yet it is by no means always So; there are minds who are virtuous enough to bear re-prooof, and magnanimous enough, not only to own their errors, but to love the perfon, whofe friendly zeal ventures to hold the mirror of truth up to their mind, at the rifque of being hated for their officioufnefs; Such exalted virtue as this, was not to be found, at that time, in my own breast, and, confeqiienily, I concluded, that it did not exist ; I therefore could only rea-fon from what I felt, and what I knew.— Pardon this digrestiorv.—Alter a long debate with mySelf, how Ioughttoa£l in this affair, I determined not to mention a word of it to Mr. Wil-lia'rns, in the hopes of making him become virtuous, by perfuading him, that I was convinced he was already fo ; this decided, I returned to the Gentlemen.
The next morning, I received a letter from Sophie, brought to me by my maid Fanny, who, I had deSired, might be Sent to me. My fister tells me, “ That my mother irritates my father cxcesttvely, by faying, that my ill condu6l was the natural confequence of the falfe education he had given me; that he had bred me up like a boy, rather than a girl; and, that stie always forefaw' what all my learning would come to. In this manner (he torments my father, (fays Sophie) fo much, that I do not think it impostible, but, from a Spirit of opposttion, he may, at last, take your Side of the question; and, if that Should happen, he will probably argue in your favour, till he convinces himfelf that you are not quite fo much to blame, as he at first thought you. Sir Charles was with my father two or three days ago; he pleaded your
caufe
9,6 T H E M E M O I R S o F
caufe like a Cicero ; but his tears, and the deep forrow which apparently had taken possession of him, argued more powerfully againssyou, than all his forced eloquence could do in your favour;
, he is fet out for//(j/y ; the parting of him, and my father, was truly pathetic ; I am glad, for your fake, that you did not fee it ; I long (o lee you, which I fhall moss certainly do, tlie first ^ moment that I can flip away, without the old folks fufpe6sing where I am going ; till when, adieu, &rc.
This letter caufed me to turn my eyes Severely on myfelf, who had rendered miferable So many worthy people, in order to gratify my own inclinations ; I was Sorry, truly Sorry, to .have given them pain ; but I loved my hulband with too much passion, to beafincere penitent;
I therefore conloled myfelf with that commonplace argument, that the evil was done for which there was now no remedy, and, consequently, J it was a folly to grieve at what could not be re- ^ called. Satisfied with this fine reafoning, I went down to dinner ; I tound, in the parlour, Mr. Smith with Mr. tVtlltams\ the former informed me, that he was just come from my father-in-law’s.— lasted, with Some impatience,
“ Well, Sir, will the father forgive the Son’s marrying without his content ?” Mr. Smith replied, “ I hope he will, Madam ; but,he began, by being very violent, talked of strange things; and did not draw a very flattering likenefs oiyouy young Gentleman, (addressing himfelf to Mr. Williams \) he Said, “ You ought to have married a woman with twenty thoufand pounds to her fortune, and that would have been too little, to Supply your extravagancies.” I told him,
“ You
Mrs. WILLIAMS.	97
“ You had married a Lady wortli a great deal more than the Sum he had mentioned, it flie was to be valued eiilier by her beauty, or merit; and that I was Sure he v/ould be of my opinion, if he would give me leave to preSent her to him.” He made me no anfwer to this propofal, which I thought a good Sign ; when, after a few minutes Silence, he Said, ‘‘ Is fhe a good oecono-mist ? V/ill the take care of her houfe ? And has fhe charms Sufficient to keep him at home? If fo, (he may prove a fortune to him, in the end.” Here I interrupted Mr. Smithy by faying, “ 'Fhat I would venture to anfwer for my-fclf, with regard to the two first articles of my father’s enquiries ; and that, as to the third, I could on'y fay, that it Should be the study of mv life, to render home agreeable to my hufband ; and that, therefore, if I did not Succeed, it would be my misiorlune, but not my fault.” Mr. Williams Said Some handfome and polite things, upon the occafion; and hAv. Smith went on informing me, That he had obtained leave to prefent me to the old folks, on Sunday next, if I would confent to go ; but, that till they had Seen me, they would not See their Son ; l^he old Lady, he laid, was much eafier to perSuade, than her hufband, which he attributed, in part, to her having conceived a very favourable opinion of me, fiom hearing that I was a great favourite of Lady Betty RuJfeFs, to whom fhe had wrote, to astt lier ientirnents of me, and ex-pebled an anfwer every day. “ Alas, Mr. Smith, (Said 1) 1 deceived tha.t worthy woman, and, therefore, I iear stie will Say no good of. me.”—“ Deceit in love and war, Madam, (re-Vo L. I.	F	plied
p8 T H E M E M O I R S o F
plied Mr. Smith) always allowed of, therefore if that is your only crime, you will, I am perfuaded, find no one to condemn you : But (continued he) Shall I have the honor of con-duffing you to your father-in-law’s on Sunday, for I must return an anfwer. I looked at my huSband, and Said, “ You, Sir, must decide that for me ; I Shall obey your commands.” He replied, “ No, my Dear, I never will command you whilst I live, b;it I will request it of you to go with Mr. Smithy according to appointment, that is, if you can, with eafe, condeS-cend to do them that honor ; tor they ought to have waited on you first, as being a bride ; but they are a queer couple, and will have their way; for my part, whilst you are there, 1 will go and dine with Tom Shirley, whom I have not Seen Since our w'edding-day ; he has been out of town, and returns to-morrow; he is Member for
our county, and a very honest fellow.”---------
“ And a very great rake, (replied Mr. Smith.) Indeed, George, you must leave off that fett of acquaintance, now you have 'got So amiable. So refpe6able a companion as that Lady.” “ Indeed, Sir, (Said Mr. Williams) but I (hall not;
I am Sure my wife will never deSire me to turn off my old friends, becaule they are, perhaps, not faints; but give me leave to tell you, that they have more honor in them, than all the formal puritanic old priggs in the univerfe put together ” Mr. Smith told him, “ That he I would not diipute that point with him now.” ' | And I alSiired Mr. Williams, “ That I would never objetl to any company he choSe to keep, as 1 was thoroughly perfuaded it could not be
bad
Mrs. WILLIAMS.	99
bad, Since, as the French proverb fays, * Dt mot qui tu b antes, et je te dir at que tu eS,
On Sunday noon Mr. Smith came, in my father Williamf% coach, to fetch me. In handing me down stairs, he perceived that I trem-, bled So much as to be hardly able to keep upon my feet ; when we got into the coach, he took notice of the trepidation I was in, and Said, “ My dear young Lady, you are to blame thus to frighten yourfelf about feeing the old folks; I am Sure they will behave very civilly to you ; they must be monsters to do otherwife, efpe-cially as you go by their invitation ; beSides (added he) I am with you, and I stiall not fit patiently by to fee you ill treated.” I thanked him, and the coach stopped at their door. Mr. Smith handed me out, and a Servant deSired us to walk up stairs ; we did So, and were introduced into a dining-room, where fat a good looking, elderly Lady, with her feet almost within the fender. She turned her head towards us, on the opening of the door, and, as if stie had not Seen me, faid, with the most provoking indifference, Your Servant Mr. Smith, is that George*?, wife?” “ Yes, Madam, (replied my friend) and fhe is wortliy to be the wife of an Emperor.” “ Come hither young woman,” fays she. I advanced. She stared at me for forne minutes, and then laid, “ Yes, I can forgive George for marrying you, becaufe you are very pretty ; if you had been lefs fo than you are, I never would have Seen him whilst I had lived ; but I like you fo well (continued she) that I believe, had i been him, I should have
* A man is known by his company.
F 2	dona
foo The MEMOIRS or done the fame thing : But pray (Said Ihe) you can live upon love, child, I fuppofe, can’t you ? It is thin diet I have heard, but I don’t find you are likely to have any other; your hufband, I can tell you, has nothing at preSent but what his father allows him, and whether he will continue that allowance now he has difobliged him, by marrying a beggar, I don’t know.”
Then taking a Second Survey of me from head to foot, She Said,“ You are very fine, child ; but I think you would have been as well drest, if your gown had been without any Silver in it ; I SuppoSe all that trumpery is not paid for yet; hey ?”—I anSwered, “ Yes, indeed. Madam, they are.” Which was the first word I had articulated Since I entered the room. My mind had undergone various revolutions in that Short Space of time. I began, by refpe6iing her as the parent of my hufband, as well as on account of her age and figure, the latter of which had much of the Gentlewoman in it, and she still was handfome. Her keeping her feat on my entering the room, and her cavalier manner of accosting me, had given Such a shock to my Spirits, or, if you pleafe, my pride, that I was ready to fink into the earth ; till, from the continuation of this abSurd and indelicate behaviour, i ceaSed to refpeft her, and she then appeared to me in So ridiculous a light, that it was no longer in her power to wound me: On the contrary, I felt my own Superiority fo forcibly, that, from a state of the most violent agitation, I became as calm as death, and as infenSible; I looked at her not without Some degree of contempt, but without feeling the least particle of humilia-fion from any thing she Said. So true it is, that
the
Mrs. williams	ioi
the fenssble mind can be hurt only by thofe whom they esteem.
Mr. Smith, who had Sat all this time like a perSon stupified with astonilhment, now looking, at me, met my eyes; I Smiled, and he Seemed to recover himSelf a little, upon perceiving me to be So much at my eaSe. My mother interrupted this Silent conversation of ours, by Saying “ Talk, child; I want to know if your mind corresponds with your figure ; but I SuppoSe not; for I am Sure you adled like a great footin marrying George.'*^ I anSwered, That if She thought that a proof of my Solly, I was afraid I should stand condemned in her opininion for an ideot, becauSe I was So far from thinking that my judgment erred in the choice I had made of her Son, that, if I could poshbly be unmarried again, I would again give him my hand at the altar.’* She was going to reply, when my father-in-law entered the room ; he fixed his eyes stedfastly upon me; and then afked his Lady, If I was his Son’s wife? “ Yes, it is Mrs. Wil-liamsf'* she replied. He instantly advanced, and Saluted me. Saying, “ I am glad to See you, daughter then turning to Mr. Smith, he added, “ You did not do her justice. Sir, when you described her perSon to me ; she is the prettiest girl, I think, that I ever Saw ; and I don’t in the least wonder, that sheturnedG^or^e’s head.’*
This old Gentleman washandfome, and wore upon his countenance an uninterrupted Smile ; he Spoke with a SoftneSs of voice which was engaging ; he postested, to a degree, that Sort of attentive poliienefs, which must ever pleale, as it puls us in good humour witli ourSelves, and generally gives us a high opinion of the perSon F 3	who
I
102 The memoirs of who has thus played upon our vanity. I have I made it an observation, through life, that few people fmile always, unlefs it be in order to hide ibme strong affe6Iion of the mind, which they are afraid the world stiould read in their faces; it ' is a kind of a malk which they put on, to conceal Some known defe6tof the heart; and it frequently Succeeds; becaufe the world, in general, judge from exteriors alone. But to return to my narration.
A Servant came and told us, that dinner was Served ; my father-in-law gave me his hand, and led me down stairs: The conversation, whilst ve were at tal)le, was chearful enough ;	[
Mr. Smith told us the news of the day, and the Master and Mistrefs of the houfe talked on various indifferent topics. I found by her difcourfe that the old Lady had read a vast deal, but j without any clue; History, Novel, Romance, MetaphySics, Phystcs, &c. were all jumbled . together; not to omit Theology, which leem-ed to have been a favourite branch of her studies : She was a rigid Church of England W'O-man, (of the High Church, I mean) and, con- ' fequently, loved the Stuart family with enthu- I fiafm, as, indeed, they must always be beloved or not at all ; for, in my opinion, one must begin by bemg mad, before one can arrive at Such a pitch of folly, as to chufe ior one’s hero’s the Ci&rrr/^’j’s and the 'James'^s. Had the quantity of furniture, which was in the good Lady’s head, been arranged, and luited to the apart-n.tnts, there was enough to have tuimfhed the . most capacious head, and not inelegantly neither ; but, unfortunately, they were all stuffed in, one upon another, in fuch a manner, that it was hardly poffible to come at what one wanted,
without
!	Mrs. williams.	103
I without the utmost difficulty. BakeFs Chroni-I cle, and the Son of Siracb, however, were, I I believe, placed pretty near the door, for ffie feem-j ed tocome at them very readily ; and, conSequenf-I ly, quoted them upon all occaSions. She had ' strong natural Senfe, but having lived a good deal out of the world, and with people of lef^s read-^ ingthan herfelf, fhe had conceived all the world to be fools, and rode triumphant U(>on their ruins; then ffie had a high idea of her birth, .and called every body, indifcriininately, who had not a title, trumpery people. In the midst of thcTe few mistaken notions (which proceeded rather from a fault in her education than her understanding) ffie had an open, generous, benevolent heart; and, put her prejudices apart, nobody judged more accurately than ffie did on any fubje£t; ffie was good natured, and had a manner of Seizing ridicule, which ffiewed the vivacity of her imagination. Such as I have here painted her, in Spite of the rough manner in which ffie had treated me, I could not help feeling fomething like an aste(3;ion for her, before the day was over. It must be obferved, however, that ffie had intirely altered her behaviour tome after the firil half hour; ffie now feemed to look upon me with a fort of tender regard, which touched my heart, and laid me again open to fenSiirility. Had ffie relapfed into her former stile, ffie would probably again have doled my heart, becauSe the imprestion ffie had made on it was recent ; but I had nothing farther to fear on that head.
Before I took my leave of my father and mother-in-law, I alkcd, in the most pathetic terms, their permistion for my huffiand to wait upon F 4	them.
i04 TheMEMOIRSof I
them. The old Lady replied, ** Yes, yes, my ' Dear, George may come, whenever he pleafes.
His father faid, “ Daughter, if his marrying of you had been his first offence, I could verv eaSily have pardoned him ; but, indeed, I am Sorry to Say it, he is a worthlefs young fellow ; and if I do fee him, it will be for your fake, Ma~ darn, and not for his own.*’ I Seized his hand, and kissed it with tears of thanks. My mother obligingly fate me down at .nay own door in her coach ; I could not prevail with her to walk up stairs ; fhedehred I would fend her Son the next morning, fo fee her and his father.
I found my hufband at home, and almost asseep in an elbow-chair ; he started from his Seaton my entering the room, and advancing to me. Said, Well, my Angel, how did they receive you ? Well, I hope ! If otherwife, by G—d I will never fee that old rafcal, my father, more.” Fye, Mr. Williams, (I replied,) I beg that your regard for me, may not make you forget the refped you owe to your parents; you injure them, if you fuppofe that they behaved ill to me j on the contrary, they treated me with more kindnefsand civility than I had any right to expe6I from them ; and they deSire to fee you to-morrow morning. Mr. Smith came in before he could make an anfwer. I made a Sign to that wot thy man, not to mention a word of Mrs.	behaviour, on my introduction
to her ; he took the hint, anti all went well.
The next day, at noon, my hufband went to dine at his father’s ; he did not return till evei>-ing, when I thought he looked much out of humour. I afked him, with an anxious concern, j “ If any thing had past between him and bis j
parents
Mrs. W I L TH a M S.	105
parents which had either dirpltafed or vexed him ?” He anSwered, Yes, my Dear, that covetous old tellow, my father, was born to plague me; 1 can get him to do nothing more lor us than he did for me before I was married, and even that only at pleafure ; for he declares, he will make no Settlement, faying. All will be mine at his death, and till then he won’t put the staff (as he calls it) out of his own hand ; however, I am to give him a list of my debts, and he has promifed to pay them. D— him, why could not he have lumped them, and give me the Sum total, without plaguing me with recolle£Iing, and Setting them down upon paper ; an old mechanical hunks, he wants tocri-ticiSe every article, and So colledt matter enough to fcold upon for the reft of his life.” I did not attempt to interrupt the courSe of his ill humour, judging it better to let it have its full vent j lb, after he had thoroughly tired himSelf and me, with abuSing his father, he reaffum-ed his good nature, and, Smiling, Said, “ Well, Charlotte, never mind, he cannot live always; So, patience. I will go to-morrow (continued he) and look out fora houSe; I don’t like lodgings. Whereabouts would you chufe to live, my Dear I anSwei ed, “ Wherever it was moll agreeable to him ; (adding) that I had no choice. Since a deSart would be delightful to me, So he was but prefent.” He thanked me for the compliment I paid him, with vivacity, and Said every thing which a well-bred man may be SuppoS-ed to have Said upon the tccaSion. 1 ventured, however, to oblcrve, “ That, though a houle was certainly preferable to a lodging, yet it could be of no uSe to us, unlels we had the means of F 5	furnishing
ro6 T n E M E M O I R S o F	I
furnishing it,” He started, and replied, “ Faith	I
I never thought of that ; but no matter, I will take up the goods, and my father may pay '
for them.----But, my Dear, (continued he) I
have a houfe already ; it is, indeed, in a part of the town which you won’t like, nor can live in; but, perhaps, you may find Some of the furniture not unufeful, and we can fell the rest ; I protest I had forgot every thing about it, if you had not luckily put it into my head ; I will go myfelf to-morrow morning, and examine it.”
I eaSily understood, that this had been a houfe in which he had kept his favourite Ladies, therefore I avoided making any enquiries, which could, in the least, embarrafs him. I Said,
“ Perhaps, my Dear, all the furniture may do for us, and, if there is enough of it, I fee no necessity there will be for our buying any new ; fuppoSing it only to be commonly decent, it will content me.” I then alked him, “ How many rooms he had in his chambers.” This I faid, to make him believe that I judged, from his faying, that the Situation of the houfe was not a proper one tor me, that he had lived in the Temple. I Saw he Seized this hint with pleasure, and anfwered me, “ I had a double Sett of chambers, my Dear,”—“ If So (I replied) I dare fay we need be at no expence for furnisti-ing a imall houfe, which is very lucky for us.
The next morning ^r..Williams went out, as he faid, to look tor a houfe, and my mother-in-law came to make me a vistt ; She talked to me in the most triendly and affectionate manner, told me, “ That my hustand was imprudent and rafii, that he had treated his father the day before with infolence, when he ought rather to
have
Mrs. wr L L r A AS S.	107
have Soothed him, by an appearance of contrition and hurr.jlity ; (She added) George always defeats his own purpoSes, by givir.g way to the heat of his temper; I with, my Dear, that you would endeavour to curb his extravagances.’*
' She then proceeded to recommend oeconomy strongly to me, and Said, “ That if any thing could reclaim a libertine, it would be the being attached to a virtuous, amiable woman like me; but continued stie, (with a Sgh,) habitual vice,	|
my Dear, is hard to concjuer ; George has a good heart, but he has unfortunately adopted a Sett of wrong principles, which, till he is con vinced they are So, will, I fear, be a Source of pain to you both.” She then afked me, “ [f we did not intend going to houfe-keeping.” I anfwered, “ Yes; but that we were a little puzzled about the means of doing it, for want of money.” She replied, ‘‘ Well, I will fee if I cannot help you a little upon that head.” She then deSired, “ That I would give her leave to introduce me to my hulband’s relations.” She named the next day for our beginning the round of vistts which she thought it necessary that I should make,, and faid, “ She would take me up in her coach, and bring me home again."’ I thanked lier, as I ought, for her goodnelsto me.
She then told me, “ That she had received an anfwer from Lady Betty Rujfel, who had been lavish in my praife, and, with her compliments on my marriage, wished me every bL-iring this world could bestow.” I was fenfibiy r<)uched at thefe marks of Lady J5^:iji’s good nature and benevolence. My mother stayed with m,e till almost dinner time, and then took her leave.
A few
io8 The M E M O I R S of
A few days alter I had been preSented to my new relations, and very politely received by them, as 1 was Sitting alone one morning, my footman brought me a letter, which he faid came by the penny-post. As on looking on the Superscription, I did not know the hand, I opened it with Some fear, lest it stiould be anonymous, to tell me anecdotes of my huSband, which I did not chuSe to hear; it contained a bank bill of five hundred pounds, with theSe words:
Madam, I have Sent you the incloSed bill, becauSe I apprehend you may want money, your hustiand being too prudent to keep much by him at a time ; take it without hefitation, as it comes from a relation of your own, and may ton be as happy as my wifhes would make you, did it depend on me.”
In a postscript were theSe words:
“ Keep this money yourSelf; be advifed, don’t give it your hustand ; you may one day want it more than you do now.”	'
I could not decide, after the most mature con- ’ | Sideration, whether this acceptable preSent came from my lather, or my uncle Boldby^ but I was certain that I owed it to one of them ; a tear of gratitude and contrition fell from my eye, on recollecting the worth of thofe fdends my ill conduft had robbed me of. Oh confeience ! how keen are thy reproaches to a mind warped irom Virtue, but not Sunk in Vice I could not however, bring mySelf to comply with the admonition given me in the letter: I thought it wrong to conceal any thing from my hulband, and bafely ungenerous to Share his fortune, and not tdTma4te him partaker of mi«e; on the contrary,
Mrs. W I L L lA M S. 109 trary, my heart exulted in the thought, of having it in my power to m?ke him fo welcome a prelent. This day was one of the few lucky ones which Fortune had, wdth a miSer’s hand, allotted tomy stare; for, whilst I wasenjoying the thought of agreeably furpri/.ing my hustand, with my treafure, Sophie, my dear Sophie, entered the room, and, in a moment, was rcund my neck. We neither of us Spoke for lome feconds; floods of tears choaked the passage of our words; when, at last, ste fell on her knees holding one of my hands between her’s, which, kiflTing with ardor, ste faid, “ Charlotte, I am come to pafs the day with you ; my father has given me leave to order tiie coach at eleven o’clock.”—“ Good God ! I exclaimed, caji he ^ be So kind. So forgiving, to his unworthy child !”
I could Say no more ; gratitude, filial tender-neSs, and conScious demerit, all rusted fo precipitately upon my fenSes, that I fainted away. Sophie flew to my aid, and, with the help of my maid, brought me to mySelf. A torrent of tears which Succeeded, calmed my Spirits enough for me to tell my fister (as far as words could do) the joy Ifelt, on Seeing her again. I* strained her to my breast, and gazed at her with the utmost delight : She looked at me, with eyes full of the tenderest pity and affcfilion ; and endeavoured to draw my attention to indifferent objedls, wisting to Subdue Senfibility, in favour of chear-fulneSs and gaiety. She Sutceeded butaukward-ly in her attempt, till Mr. Williams came home, when his vivacity and humour dissipated our tender melancholy. He was obliged to lee Sophie,
She told us, “ That my friends were pleaSed to hear, that his were reconciled to us.” I ast-
ed
no Th£ MEMOIRS OF
ed Sophie, “ If She knew any thing of my father or uncle’s having wrote to me ?” She Said
No ; and ssie dared to fay, that they had not.” I put this question to her when Mr. Williams was gone out of the room: She stayed with me till eleven. When the coach came for her, I dtSued her to give my refpedtful duty to my parents; She promifed that I Should Soon fee her again, and then wiShed me a good night.
I'he next day, I went to fee a houSe in--
Square ; I liked it much. Mr. Williams took a leafeof it for Seven years, and then ordered his furniture to be removed into it, which, when done, I went to examine, I found it rich, but much foiled ; the Silk damaSk 1 ordered to be cleaned ; the chairs, beds., &c. were good; there was no kitchen furniture, nor any linen. He told me, that he had a good quantity ot the latter, and he fancied he could get it again ; I never aSked by what means; and, in about a weeks time, a porter brought to our lodgings a large bundle of dirty houfhould linen, which, upon examination, was new, but had been very ill ufed; no part of it had ever been hem’d, and it was cut and stained in many places; however, with proper management, I hoped to make it both good and ufeful. 1 eafily guested, that thefe things had been fetched out ol pawn, and fo, it Seems, they were ; for my hufband told me fo, on his return home, but ilid not tell me who had difpofed of them in that manner, nor did I enquire. Mr. Williamd^ moiher made us a prefent of Some iifetul ctnna, and his father gave us as much plate as was neceffry for our Small family ; thus we found otirlelves
fettled
Mrs. W I I, L I a M S. hi
fettled in our houSe, almost without any aSIual expence on our parr, I obferved, with infinite concern, that my hufband, and his father, were not upon good terms; they always bickered in company; and I found Mr. Williams very unwilling to attend me, when I went to vifit the old folks. I expostulated with him, in the gentlest terms, upon the impropriety ol Such a conduct, but was always anfwcred, “ Indeed, myDear, you do not know that old fellow ; an angel from Heaven could not keep his temper with him : I know he is all Smiles with you but he is the Devil with me.” He added, “ I would rather, a thoufand times, go to a goal, (if it was not for your fake) than be obliged to him for paying what I owe.” I found there the fhoe pinched.
One day, when I was alone with my father-in-law, he began abufing his Son in the most indecent manner, called him an extravagant, debauched villain ; he then told me how often he had paid his debts, and to what amount, they were, indeed, by his account, very considerable ; He added, “ and now though I offer once more to clear him w'ith the world, he will not give me in a lair list of his debts ; he has two reafons for this refufal, (continued the old Gentleman ;) the one is, becaufe he is afhamed of the nature of them ; and lire next is, that he wants me to give him the Sum total of what he owes, that he may put the money in his pocket and not pay one of his creditors a fai thing out of it; he has feived me fo before, fays he, fo I fhall take care how I trust him for the future.” Here he paufed. I could make no anfwer to this cruel harangue, but by a figh I He looked at me, and feeing furrow painted in my countenance.
112	Thr MEMOIRS OF
nance, he Said, “ Yes, child, you have reaSon enough to Sigh, for having flung yourfelf away, in Spite of your parents care of you, upon Such a worthlefs fellow as George is ; and, you may depend upon it, that, whenever he grows tired of you, (which he would do, in a fhort time, of	herfelf) he.will infallibly leave you to
V beggary and mifery, whilst be purfues new pleasures.” At this prophecy (for it really was one) I could restrain my tears no longer ; I begged of him to Spare my fenfibility, and to think more favourably of his Son : But he Silenced me, by faying, “ Daughter, I know him much better than you do; and have thought proper to let you a little into his real character, out of pity to your youth and inexperience.”
Thus this cruel old man, under a pretence of compastion and benevolence, had, in a great meaitire, robbed my breast of peace, and filled my mind with fufpicion and terror. From bis study I went into his wife’s drelSing-room : On my entrance fhe alked me, with concern, “ If I was not well ?” I told her, “ That I was just come from having a conversation with my father-in-law, which had given me unutterable pain 1 then narrated it to her. She coloured, and, with great heat, replied, “ Mr. Williams is a fool, child, to talk to you in that manner, and fol Ihal! tell him; befides, he lies, (thefe were her words;) tor	has been a rake, it is
true ; but lean tell him, that he is a very honest fellow, as well as a very pretty Gentleman ; and as he loves you to distraUion, which I perceive he does, it is in your power not only to reform him; but to make what you will of him. So all bis future condu6t, whether good or ill, I lhail
lay
Mrs. W I L L I A M S. 113
lay to your charge ; for I am convinced that you can lead him, with a sine thread, which way you pleaSe.” I trembled at this positive assertion, as I knew the chara^er of my mother in-, law was, that whenever fhe adopted an opinion, however abfurd or unjust it might be, (he never departed from it. I assured her, “ That though I did not think my power to be So abfolute as fhe Seemed to think it, yet I would ufe all the afcen-dancv I had over him, to engage him to a6l prudently, and this both for my own fake, as well as for the refpeft and love I bore to him and his
parents.”----” Make him, then, (fhe replied)
bring in an honest list of his debts to his father, no matter of what nature they are, and then all will go well ” I promised to ufe my endeavours to that effe6t, and fo we parted.
On my return home, Mr. Williams afked me “ what conversation I had had at my father’s ?” I repeated to him what his mother had faid, but fuppreffed the abusive part of his lather’s dif-courle. He started from his chair, and, with an air of passTion, Said, “ Well, my Dear, for your fake, and not to oblige them, I will give an account of what I owe ; but it is Such a trifle that It would make a man mad, to fee what a bustle they make about it ; the whole don’t amount to three thouSarid pounds.” I was Surprized at the largeneSs of the Sum, efpecially when I considered his youth, and that his father had already paid his debts twice. However, at last, the affair was Settled amicably enough between them, but not before the old man had made his Son fwear Solemnly, that the account he had given in, was a just one ; that he had made no
relerve,
f
114 TheMEMOIRSof
referve, nor Secreted the fmallest article from his knowledge. He repeatedly Said, “ George, you Swear, that when I have paid this money for you, you are clear of the world, and don’t owe any one in it So much as a farthing ?” He answered, I do Swear to it, Sir.” It would have been happy for us all, had he been Sincere when he made this afSeveration ; but, unfortunately for himSelf, as well as tor me, he was not So. This important affair over, as I thought,
I requested Mr. Smith, for whom I had conceived a real Iriendfhip, to find out for me the unfortunate g'l'i, who had Sent to me; he did So, and brought me word, that She was in very : good keeping ; So I thouglit I had nothing more 1 to do with her.	1
I now turned all my attention towards the I attaining domestic happineSs ; we Saw a great deal of company ; I Sometimes went into public, but rarely. Mr. Williams v/ns always gay, well-bred, and good-humoured ; he was, however, a good deal from home, and very often stayed out extremely late. I never enquired where he had been, and always welcomed him with a Smile of complacency ; as I was well convinced, that reproaches and four looks will never keep a man at home,, when chearfulnefs and good na-r ture cannot do it. A perSeverance in the latter conduU has, I believe, reclaimed Some libertines; but I never knew a practice of the lor-mer produ6live of any good. 'The man who comes home, only becauie he is afraid of being Scolded when he stays out, is no companion for a Sentimental mind. I think, when the love of peace is the only motive for my hufband’s giving me his company, I would of the two rather be without it.	In
Mrs. W I L L I A M S. 115	H
In general, let a woman make a man’s home	H
agreeable to him, and he will, in time, prefer it	■
to all other places; there are exceptions to this	H
as well as to all other rules, but I have Seldom	H
feen the instance. The great error, which my	||
fex frequently fall into, is, that they fuppofe the	H
lover and the hufband to be the fame individual,	H
which is a palpable mistake ; the hufband may	H
love as well as the lover, but his pastion will	H
bear a very different character. It is the want	H
of this knowledge which makes )oung married	H
Ladies very troublefome to their hufbands, from	H
a Supposition, that they arc neglefied if a man	H
is out of their fight for an hour or two; they are	H
astonistied how he can be capable of taking any	H
pleafure w'hen abfent from them; and attiibute	H
the want of that assiduous attention, which pre-	H
ceded their marriage, to difgust, or a cold indifference : when, in truth, it is nothing more than the natural confequence of postesting w hat, witii ardor, we afpired to attain : Whilst we purfue, the mind is in a continual state of agitation, which gives adlivity to all the fenfes ; but when once arrived at the gaol, we are not leis happy, perhaps, hut w'e are always more calm, and, consequently, lets expletive. It is, in this state of tender tranquillity (if I may be allowed the phrafe) that a man begins to Survey the partner of his fortunes through the optic of reafon, unobitrudled by the vapours of pastion ; and it is at this period that the woman fhould endeavour, by the stri6lest attention to her every word and adion, to fix on her hufband’s mind a thorough conhdtnce in her virtue, an approbation of her conduCr, and a reflected esteem for her chara6ter in general; thefe Sentiments will naturally produce
T
ii6 The MEMO IRS &c.
duce friendship, which, when built on fo noble a basts, can never fail of lasting as long as the merit which gave birth to it, exists.—Don’t be angry, ddelaidcy I will return to nty story this minute.
From the character of extravagancy, which my father and mother-in-law had given me of their fon, I had determined, contrary to my first refoUilion, to follow the advice of the peifon who had Sent me the Bank bill ; judging, that ; my huSband might probably want money hereafter, more than he did now, and that, in any i emergency of that nature, he would be agreeably Surprized at meeting with fo unexpeded a refource.
I
E N D o/' V O L. I.
I
I
i
1
i
I
I
i
I
.	I
1
LETTERS
BETWEEN
An ENGLISH LADY
AND
Her FRIEND at P A R I S.
In which are contained
The M E M O I R S
Mrs. .WILLIAMS.
By a L A D Y.
V o L. JL
DUBLIN:
Printed for J. Williams, J. Porter, R. Moncrieffe and T. Walker. MDCCLXX.
i''‘-^v L fi'V .	*;■'’ '■'■■•'	-s'"'	’ '	,'^'-=;
' Ay ■' i 'A SJ>-:^v’ •	■ 7
"■	■ .	. •'	’-' d I V r .-I i	*-'\ ' A
_ ■ A & AJ ii^ I J C LI a nA|
j '■
, - >.-
■'■ ■' *‘ .	■ -■ '	-	' Via
,	mrcia'ii -aiL- 1
,	,.	,	,-3_ n lii ;!.!*• i-1	" j
« 4
. ■ I tJ iV. L V sh r ■
-	-' -/ ■	' ,’ — ' k
Vi ' . , p i/tiA f J \*j	ii
.C* i'T ;i j. \ i ^	.-.ji'!..	^ <,5
-------••~~TT7~'~^C~''~~''------------------V
c^' j '______- .	_^- ■	^____i
i:f '	■” ■•'■° ' ■ '■ ‘ ’ ■ ' 1
^ ■'/	•	■'■. L-- ■ '
.si vi F\ \j '3	%
^A ,	■ i'«0'v 1 ,y	n r: »r ?io i, G7T: 2 >;1.
?•	.	L.rAV/ . r huj-	'	,J1' VJ
V, ■	- .rv.rrjai' ■•	■
M « »; « B i-
ll'S :«:«: xm ^■« I
THE
MEMOIRS
I
O F
Mrs. williams.
I •
•	Twdve-month had now past Since our
yk \ marriage pretty peaceably, during '	^	which time I was brought to bed of
I	a boy, to the great joy of the Wi/~
j Hams tamily. My uncle wrote me a letter upon the occafion, in which he deSired he might be a god-fatherto my child. I begged h\v. Williams would wait upon him with our Sincere thanks, for this his genteel and friendly offer; and at the fame time to try, if he could engage him to stand for his Son in perSon, as he was to be christened at home ; he did fo, and fucceeded. My aunt called one morning to alk me how I did. Thefe events gave me great pleafure, as I had long Suffered from the idea, that I was an alien on earth, and belonged to nobody,being abandoned by all my own relations, excepting poor Sophie. My aun teven promifed me to ufe her endeavours to bring my father to fee me, when I fhould be able to go out, and added, that, in cafe he con-
. fen ted
1
120 The memoirs of
fented which (he was pretty Sure he would, (he deSired (he might introduce me to him, and would Gallon me, in her coach, for that purpofe, at the time appointed. Thus theSe good folks, like the rest of the world, feeing me well establi(h-ed, as they thought, and judging that I should never want any thing of them, were ready to be reconciled to me; but had wifely waited to fee how affairs would turn out, before they shewed me any countenance, having previousty determined, that, if I had made a bad match I might take the confequences of it, and starve | for my punishment. Tliis is one oi thofe fen- i timents which is frequently found in the breasts j of parents, and which, T confefs, I have never been able to account for. ’When a girl marries | against the confent and approbation of her pa- | rents, I should think the crime lay in the a£t of ! d'fobedience, and was neither to be aggravated i or mitigated by the confequences it produces, | which have, in my apprehenSion, nothing to do | with the motive for our anger; they may indeed, affe£t us with an increale of Sorrow, or an alleviation of it, as the girl is made either happy, or miferable, by her choice ; but, her j being the latter, ought, in my opinion, to divest the heart of all refentment, and lay it open to the tenderer fenfations of pity and forgivenefs ; Since, to the truly benevolent, and generous mind, the unhappy cannot be in the wrong.
'Ishe world in general, however, as I have ahead)' obferved, a£t upon principles diarnetii- , cally oppoSite to ihcle, and io did my parents ; for I was received on my aunt’s prelenting me to my father, if not with [deafure, at least with great good humour and civility. My mother
eyed
xMrs. WILLIAMS.	I2I
eyed me, with a look, as I thought, of tender concern; and Said, (with Seemingly a mother’s feelings) ‘‘ My dear Charlotte, you look Sadly ; do have a difli of chocolate, or a glaSs of wine.” I thanked her for this kind attention tomy health ; and, indeed, I believe, that Since I had ceaSed being a competitor with Sophie in my father’s favour, She began to conSider me as her child. My father’s penetrating eyes Seemed to pierce my breast, and every time mine met them, I thought he was reading my huSband’s Sailings in the book of my heart- This idea pained me; he perceived it, and Said, Don’t be uneaSy, my poor girl; I am no conjuror, nor will I endeavour to See into your thoughts farther than you chuSe I fhould.” I anSwered, “ That I hoped I Should never have any, for the future, which could merit his disapprobation.” He replied, with a Sigh, “ What is past, child, cannot be recalled; there is no remedy, now,for the error you have committed ; and, in the preSent weak state of your health, it would be as cruel as uSeleSs to upbraid you with it; you have, therefore, continued he, nothing to fear from me on that fubjedt, either now, or hereafter; let the conSequences of the falSe step be what they may.” TheSe last wmrds were (poken with a tone of indifference, which pieiced me to the Soul. I loved my father with the utm<‘ft tenderneSs, and was wounded to death to und raySelf treated by him with much moreuvility than affeQion. I knew his inexorable temper and therefore concluded, that, though he kept up appearances, yet I had forfeited his love and esteem for ever. They gave me leave, how-VoL. II.	B	ever
, ■■ '1
122 T H E M I. M O I R S o f
ever, to prefent my luiihand to them the next day, and my mother goocl-natiiredly laid to me,
“ You may take your lister Iiome with you, if you will.” Upon which, Sophie and I took our leaves of them, and returned home, where we found Mr. Williams talking to an odd looking | man, in the parlour. He accosted me with a I Smile, faying, “ My Dear, I have been buying a little estate in the country, of that man you faw with me.” 1 replied, with a Seemingly chearfniair, “ I am glad to hear it, my Dear, ssnee I fuppofe you have had lome revelation of a hidden treafure, with which you intend to pay for it.” lie looked grave at this anSwer, and Said, “ He had bought it for me, thinking that the air of the country would be of Service to myfelf and child.” I thanked him cordially tor his tender care of our healths ; and added,
“ But, Mr. Williams, excufe me if I fay, that no air can be found falubrious, where tlie mind is not at peace ; and, Ihould you involve yourfelr in difficulties for my fake, you would defeat ' your own purpofes ; fori can never be either i happy, or well, if you are uneafy.” He replied, I “ That I always looked too far before meand observed, “ That nobody could enjoy ihc pre- \ fent, who was fo anxious for the future.^* To this reproof I made no anfwer.
The next morning, lie deSired I would go with him to look at thehoufe he had purchafedj I confented ; as it was only fourteen miles from tov.'n, it was a morning’s ride thither, and back , again. As we came near the place, Mr. Wil- : liams Said, “ I'here, my Dear, that is the j houfe,” (pointing to it;) It is very old, (continued
Mrs. W I L L I a M S. 123
tinued he,) but I intend to re-build it ; it is a fiveet Utiuiion.” Upon getting out or the chariot, I was Surprized at the ruinous condition it, and. every riling around it feenied to be in; it looked as if it had been uninhabited for fisty years; and, in fact, that was the cafe ; as there had been a long Chancery Suit to decide whom it belonged to; and, in the mean lime, nobody would repair it, lest they Ihould be laying out money on another perfon’s property. Mr. lViUiums \\\tsijtd me the beauty of the prof-pe£fs on all Sides of the houfe, and feemed enchanted with his new acquisition : I cannot fay I was ; but I concealed my fentiments, faying only, “ That if lie liked it, I was convinced that I ihould.” He then expatiated on the alterations he purpoled to make in the garden, out-houfes, <3rc. and laid a plan, which, to execute, must have cost him, at least, fifteen hundred pounds. I durst not make an estimate of the expence to him, becaufe of the reproof I had drawn upon myfelf the day before. On our return home, Mr. Williams fald to me, in acarelefs eafy manner, “ Charlotte^ I must in-fist, that if my father and mother stiould blame me for having bought a houle in the country, that you inlorm them, that 1 purchafed it to oblige you ; for (continued he,) their being angry with you, can be of no | manner of fignifi-cation but their quarrelling with me, would probably be the ruin of us both.” I replied, “ That I Ihould ever be both ready and willing ■tofacrifice myfelf in order to fave him; and therefore, would confent to let his parents fup-13 2	post
1
124 TheMEMOIRSof	I
pofe that he had purchaled this estate at my request ; but that I must beg to be excufed from asserting a palpable faKhood ; and, therefore, could only promife not to contradidi him, in cafe he ihould find it abfolutely necessary to sting the blame on me. He did not Seem much pleafed with the tenderneSs of my confcience ; however that might be, he amufed himlelf daily in the country amongst his workmen, and wascon-fequently, very Seldom ai home but in the evenings. He had a pastion for building, and laying out of ground, and had a pretty taste in both, as well as Some judgment. Thefe his frequent excurSions Soon informed his parents of what he was about; they took the alarm, and Sent for him one morning, to come to them iinmediate-ly : What passed at this interview, I know not; j but the next time 1 waited upon them, I was re- j ceived with great coolnefs, and had a lediure read ' to me upon ceconomy, and Several hints thrown j out, “ That they who were worth nothing, were generally the most liberal of other people’s money.” I felt this reproach Severely,.though I wasconfcious that I did not merit it. I could make no defence, my tongue was tied ; fo they attributed my Silence either to obstinacy, or to an acknowledgment of my indifcretion : 'Fhis restedtion filled my heart with grief and humiliation. I found myfelf fallen in the esteem of thofe whom it was both my interest, as well as inclination, to oblige, and on the good opinion of whom, my hufband’s future behaviour tome would, I apprehended, greatly depend. I Saw, with inexpressible concern, that their friendlhip
was
Mrs. V/ I L L I a ms. 125
was Irretrievably lost to me, Since I was destined to adopt all my hufband’s errors.
Thus he went on, involving himfelf more and more in debt. His parents daily remonstrated to him the evil confequences which must accrue from fucli an inconSiderate conduct; never failing to add, that he must not hope for any farther astistanc?from them. 'I'hey repeatedly told me, “ That it w'ould not be long be-fpre Istiould have reafon to repent the having drawn my huiband in Such fciiemes of extravagancy and expente.” With an unfeeling air, ne would often stand by, and hear me reprimanded for his faults. ']"o do him justice 1 really believe that the infenstbility he fhewed upon thefe occaSions,' pioceeded more from the thorough contempt he had of iiis parents, than from a want of good-nature in hitn; he conceived their anger, or approbation, to be equally inftgnificant in themfelves, and only of con-fequence, as they couhi either lutrt or advance his interest. In this perplexed state of affairs, I comforted myfelf with tite hopes of keeping my huSoand within bounds, with regard to his building in tlje country. I liad already prevailed with him to pull down but one front of the houfe, declaring my attachment to that which looked into the garden : I now fhewed a great impatience for its being finisted; pleaded the necesiity of our child’s going into the country; in fhort, from continually teazing him, by my enquiries when it would be ready for us to go into, I curtailed his plan fo constderably, that he one day told me, that the whole expence he had been at, would not .amount to more than B -3	four
126 The MEMOIRS op	^
four hundred pounds, or a trifle over. TIihs information gave me much pltaSure, as I now ; found it in my power to pay all ids workmen, 1 and to make him a preient of tlic houSer my heart exulted in the thoug.ht; and I enjoyed in ^ idea the pleafure and furgrixe it would l>e to my j huSband, when^I prefented^dm with liic five hundred pound
Full of thel-4:«vihnp: r'^ffelions, 1 was one night iitting a!one^xpeiSii.ng my hiifhand home every inirihie, wjfen I heard d rap at the door,. and naturally colluded it \^s 1dm ; but, to my great Surprize, a Gentleman, whom I did not khow, entered the room ; he bowed, and made foihe handfome apologies for intruding upon me at fuch,an unfeafonable hour, but astedged, in his excufe, that he had att affair of coni'equence | to communicate to me, and begged the i'eryant ' might retire, Ididnotchufe to be left alone, I at that time of night, with a stranger; but, upon his giving me a letter from my huiband, I or-ilered the Servant to leave the room ; and then, with a trembling hand, I broke tiie feal, faying, at the lame time, “ Pray, Sir, has any accident * liappened to Mr. Williams He anfwered,
“ i’hat the letter would inform me.” 1 then attempted to read it, but in vain; I found a mist before my eyes, my heart palpitated, and I I funk lifelefs from my chair: 1 he Gentleman	'
.. instantly rung the bell for aflistnnee; al ter ibme	I
minutes 1 recovered, and again ordered the ler-vants to quit the room; upon which tlie stranger faid tq me, “ I am much concerned. Madam, to fee you thus alarmed ; I wilh I had told you the affair at once, which is not near fo bad, I
can
Mrs. WILLIAMS	127
can aSTure you, as you Seem to be apprehenSive of; your ):u(hand is very well, as you would have found, could you have read his letter: The cafe is this; as I was corning from a tavern tonight, where I had Supped with Some friends, I favv a crowd in the Strand ; being curious to know what was the matter, 1 went up to it, and found there a Ge^leman strivijig to refeue him-felf from tv./o BauTiffs, who bad hold of him ; upon coming nearer him, f perceived it to be young Mr. lVilliams\ upon, which 1 accoHed him, and advifed to i’ubi<|it, and to go with the men to a Sponging-houfe, where he might flay ’till to-morrow, and then get bail, it being now too late, With mucli difficulty I got him to confent to what tliey would have forced him
to without it : I accompanied him to --,
where, after having wrote tltal letter, he begged me to convey it to you, Mad im, and to defire you, from him, rrot to make youi lelf uneafy upon his account, as he would certainly dine with you to-merrow’. I then alked tlie Gentleman, at whole Suit he had been at rested ? He anfwer-ed inc, that he was totally ignorant as to that particular, as well as of the Sum for which he was arrested ; 1 then enquired much if he was in a good room, and well taken care of; he af-fured me he was; and then, taking his leave of me, faid, “ He stiould, with my permifSion, take the liberty of waiting upon me the next day, in order to enquire after my health, and to offer me his fuithcr Services, if I would honor him with my commands.” 1 thanked him very Sincerely, and wiihed him a good night. 1 leave you to judge what fort of one I past.
B 4	'The
1
128 The MEMOIRS of The next morning I determined to go myfelf to the place of Mr. Williamds confinement, in order to pay the debt. I now reproached mySelf for not having Saved my hufband this difhonour by giving him the bank note Sooner, as I concluded, that Some of the work people, who were employed in repairing the houfe in the country, had grown impatieftt for their money, and So had caufed him to be arrested. This was a very natural idea, as I firmly believed, that he had no other debts but Such as were contrafil-ed upon that account. As foon, therefore, as I thought it a decent hour to go out, (tor I had impatiently counted every clock Since the Gentleman had left me, fuch was my eagernefs to fee my hufband,) I got into a hackney chair,and ordered it to the place where Mr. Williams was confined. On my arrival at the door of the houfe, I alked an ilMoooking man, who stood there, if I could fee the Gentleman wh.o was brought there late laSt night, not chufing to mention his name j he replied, “ Yes, Mifs,
I will let the Gentleman know you are here, if you will tell me your name, for he has got company with him already; and perhaps he may not chufe to have two wenches at a time.” I annexed no idea to what the man Said, at that time; So, putting half a crown into his hand, he immediately kd me up stairs, and opened the door of the chamber where hlr. Williams was.
But how lhall I paint to you my astonistiment ! on finding fiim fit with his arm round a pretty young woman’s neck, who was Seated on his lap. The hurry of Spirits I had undergone, ever Since the night belore ; the novelty of the
Icene
Mrs. W I L L I a M S,	i 29
Scene which now prefenteci itfelf before me, joined to the quick tranSition it occaSioned in roe, from the joy I had conceived of being his liberator, to the Surprize, Sorrow, and mortification, of finding him in Such company, and in Such an attitude, all together overcame me So intirely that I could not Speak ; my legs tottered under me ; I Seized hold of the firfl: chair I came near and then let mySelf fall. Silent and pale, into it. I did not, however, lofe my fenfes, though I did my Speech ; I had of them just enough left to perceive my hustiand’s confufion ; his Fair One Seemed much leSs diSconcerted than he. He begged her, in a low voice, to leave the room ; to which fhe anfwered, Speaking very loud, “ that fhe would not; that I Should know her wrongs, and that (he would be paid.” Mr. Williams then advanced to me with a timid step, and an eye confessing Shame ; he took my hand, and, putting it to stis mouth, Said, “ I^oveliest, beft of women, hear me before you condemn me,” I made no anSwer, neither did I withdraw my hand from his; he continued, “ That wcrthlefs girl you fee there, my Dear, was kept by me, before I married you ; and, in the enthufiafm of a brutal passion. She had the ad-drefs to inveigle me to give her a promissory note for a Sum of money, to be paid her in cafe I ever turned her off : and it is for the payment of this note, that She has now arrested me; and this is not all, for She has the impudence to tell me, that I gave her credit to many Shop-keepers, where She has taken up goods in my name and Shall fend them all to me to be paid.” I anfwered B 5	witfi
130 The M E M O I R S OF	|
with a faint voice, “It Is but just that you Ihoiild fulfil the obligations which you voluntarily laid yourfelf under to that young woman-” “ Thank you, Madam,” Said tiie girl: “ I wanted (continued fhe,) to have carried in all my demands upon him, to his father, when he paid his debts but Mr. Williams would not let me, faying he would pay me himSelf very Shortly, yeti never could get a farthing from him, from that time to this ; and just now, when you came in, he j was coaxing me to give him another year’s credit; but I won’t do any Such thing.” To end all disputes between them, I aflced her, it Ihe would take my word for the payment of the note ? which I then deSired to fee ; fhe fhew'ed it me ; I told her, that if stie would call upon me any time that day, I gave her my honour, that I would pay her the m.oney ; and, in the mean time, I Said, do yon discharged Mr. Wil-liatrs. She looked at me steadily for Some moments, and then replied, “ Yec, Madam, I will trust to your honor ; at what hour Shall I wait on you I anSwercd, In half an hour after Mr. Williams is at liberty, if you pleaSe.” All this paSt without any interruption on the part of my huSband, who continued Sitting in his chair Silent and penSive, and, as I thought, looking rather fooliih than otherwiSe.
MiSs Fanny Fetch (for it was her,) ran dov/n stairs, in order to perform her part of the agreement ; which, after Mr. Williams ha.A paid the fees, and Some other exorbitant demands, was thoroughly effc-dfed; and he returned home with me in a hackney coach, where, as Soon as
we
Mrs. WILLI A i\l S.	131
we were Seated, he took my hand, and Said, “ My amiable wife, what a contemptible figure must I, at this moment, make in your eyes! Can you Forgive me, Charlotte F* Without waiting my aniwer, he went on, “ But, indeed, my Dear, I am not So criminal as you may perhaps, imagine me to be ; I did not kifs that infamous girl from any love I had for her, but merely for your fake, in order to engage her to give me a. little more time, and then I hoped to have paid her, without the affaii’s ever coming to your knowledge.” I anfwered, “ That the intention might be good, but that! thought the means rather indelicate.” I Spoke very little in our way home, lest I fhould betray the reSentment which filled my bolom, on his having deceived his father and me, in So attrocious a manner ; and, in the humour I was then in, I thought he did not deServe my love; I therefore relolved, for the future, to do my duty, in every reSpe6t as a wife, but never more to entertain in my breast any tenderer Sentiments for liim than thoSeol trieudstiip. Tiiis was a wife plan ; and I don’t doubt but you are convinced, that I lound it very eaSy to put into pradtice, as I had impoSed upon mySelf a talk which would, from its difficulty, have almost startled a Stoic ; a tallc, which was never accompliffied but by thoSe few, and refpeclable PhiloSophers, who, from a study of themSelves, had acquired the power of Subjecting iheixr paffions to reafon, and, by making her defpotic, rendered them staves. The pradiice, however, of this Sublime philoSo-phy, appeared, to my inexperience, no very difficult undertaking, as I fooliShly imagined
that
1
132 The memoirs of that love could not exist, where we ceafed to esteem. - But to my Story.
On our arrival at home, I Sent the Bank bill of five hundred pounds, to be changed into Smaller ones, and, when MsSs Taw/ry came, I paid her one hundred pounds, which was the Sum promised her by the note. I then aflced her, “ What were the bills which She had Said She expected Mr. Williams \o piy V' She anSwered, Why, Madam, you are to know, that when your huf-band took me into keeping, I was but a poor girl, and had but a few cloalhs; So as he promised that I Should, for the future, never want money, and that 1 Ihould always go as fine as a Queen, he went with me to Several (hops, and gave me credit in them, by Setting his name, or writing Something at the bottom of a blank leaf in their books, to be filled up with the articles I choSe to buy.”—“ Piay, Said I, can youguefs what the Sums amount to, which you fay he owes on your account ?” She replied, “ 1 don’t know justly. Madam ; but, it you defire it, I will enquire, and let you know'.” I anSwered carelel'sly, “ No, you need not give yourSelf that trouble, as it is not in my povver to pay them, and I know his father won’t ; So that I much question whether the people will ever get their money or not, at least as long as the old Gentleman lives.” She Said, “ It was all one to her but I Saw Ihe did not Speak truth, which was what I wanted to know ; tor I fuSpecIed that She and the irades-people understood one another.
I told her, “ It would be necessary to prove the delivery of the goods, and that file must Swear to the having received them, or elfe, I apprehended,
Mrs. W I L L I a U S. 133
hendecl, their demands would never be looked upon as just debts; but I leave that to their consciences and your own, Said T, for I have nothing to do in the afFiirst’. The girl took this occaSion of thanking me for the ten guineas 1 had Sent her in her distrefs, as fhe Said ; then, after having wistied me health and happinefs, fhe went away. I went into the parlour to my hufband, with his note, which I had just discharged, in my hand ; I gave it to him, defir-ing he would burn it. He Said to me, “ Pray, my Dear, may I be permitted to enquire, how you came by the money you have just now So generousty paid for me?*’	1 replied, “ Yes,
Surely, Sir ; you have a right to aSk the question ; and it is both my duty and inclination to * anSwer itI then preSented the letter to him, in which the bill had been inclofed, faying, at the fame time, “ 1 always intended to give it to you, Mr. Williams, but waited an occasion, when, from your wanting of ready cast, it might have been rendered more acceptable to you; I will, however, confefs, that felt-interest was, in Some meafure, the motive for my having thus Secreted my riches from you : I had pleafed mySelf with the thoughts of paying off
all your workmen at--------, by which means I
stould have procured to rnyfelf (in a manner) the fatisfaffion of making you a prefent of the houfe ; but things have turned out oiherwife; there. Sir, is the remaining four hundred pounds, difpofe of it as you stall judge proper; it is your own ; and I give you my honor, that I never intended to appropriate one farthing of it to my own ufe j but 1 flatter myfelt, that I
have
n
134 Th E M E M O I R S o F
have no occafion to ufe many arguments, in order to convince you of the truth of this assertion, as I am perfuaded you will readily acquit I me of harbouring fo mean a thought; the money was of no estimation in my eyes, but as it rpight be the means of giving you pleafure.”
Here I paufed. He looked at me with Seeming admiration, and Said, “ I was a generous, noble girl, thanked me with ecstacy, and took the money.”
Yet, in the midst of this his apparent approbation of my conduct, I could plainly fee that he was disappointed in finding I gave (o good an account how I came to be fo rich. He had alked me, “ where I got the money,” with an air of confidence, not unmixed with farcafm, which did not efcape my observation ; from whence I • fuSpeCfed, that he wilhed to have found me a little in the wrong, in order to have put us moie upon a level. This difcovery, from a perversity, I fuppofe, in my nature, determined nie to persist obstinately in being in the right ; for which purpofe, as far as my youth and inexperience would admit, I w'eighed every word I Spoke, and tenacioussy examined every action of my life ; fo that when 1 erred. I may with truth aver, that it was the fault of my judgment, and never an acl of my will.
I now Seldom faw either my father or mother-in-law ; they looked upon me as an extravagant, unthinking girl, who would be the ruin of their Son ; they had heard he was arrested, but not at whofe Suit ; fo, their minds having already taken that bent, without any farther enquiries into the matter, they fet it down as a fa£t,. that
I had
Mrs. WILLIAM S. 135
I had been the occafion of it. Amichl all theSe unpleaSing events, I leave you to judge what were my feeling', and how my m:nd must have fufrercst ; and the more So, as I endeavoured to	!
conceal my grief, even from the author of it.
We were now to go into the country for the	j
Summer; I therefore waited upon my own fa-	j
mily, to take my leave of them; we were upon cold, civil terms only, becaufe they were now pretty well acquainted with the chara£ler of my hufband, from public report, and from thence,
I imagine, forefaw that I might postlbly be distressed enough hereafter, to apply to them for relief. My father, after having remarked that I looked very ill. Said, “ If your indifpostiion proceeds from grief, Charlotte^ you are really 'to be pitied, as you have not left yourfelf a friend who would either relieve, or even compassionate you, after the obstinate, premeditated manner, in which you stew from certain hap-pinefs, to the embraces (I am afraid) of indigence and mifery.” I fold him, “ That I waited upon him to wifh him every blessing in life, and to beg that he would remember me with the ast'e6tion of a parent to a child, but that I came not to afk either his pity or assistance, as,
I thanked God, I wanted neither of them, and that, if I did, I was fenssble that I had not de-ferved them from him ; but his- love I would afk ; and alfo fhould try, by every action of my future life, to merit it.’* He Seemed moved by this anfwer, and Said, with Some emotion,
“ God blefsyou, my poor child 1” My eldest brother w'as in the room ;I had not Seen him for lome time, as he had been almost always at
fchool
--------------------------------------------n
136 The memoirs of
fchool from his inlancy ; he kissed me tenderly, and appeared to be delighted at feeing me ; he was two years younger than myfelf, and, consequently, still a boy ; I thought him a pretty figure, but my mind was, at that time, too much agitated to take much notice of him. My mother took a tender leave of me, and Sophie cr;ed ready to break her heart on bidding me adieu ; they were to return into the country the next day.
From my father^s I went to my uncle’s. My aunt had taken the ton of the family, consequently was very referved ; but my uncle told me, wdthanairof great cordiality, that he was very glad to fee me ; be Said, “ He had heard from his nephew, Sir Charles, who defired his refpe6lful compliments to me, and had enquired much after my health, and welfare: What Shall 1 tell him, my dear } (continued he.) Shall 1 fay you are happy ? V.^ell, I cannot, for you look dreadfully; but you are breeding, Ifuppofe, fhall I fay fo ?” I anfwered, “ Indeed I am not; and I beg. Sir, that you would be fo obliging as to make my compliments to Sir Charles Stanly, and to fay, that I am infinitely fen-fible of his kind enquiries after me.” FJere I rofe to take my leave, alledging, as an e.xcufe for the short stay I made with them, the multiplicity of visits I had to make. My uncle wished me my health, &c. and my aunt was my most humble tervant.
From thence 1 went to my father-in-law’s, where I was received with a Smile of affability by the old Gentleman, and with a Irown of anger by the old Lady. The former after having talked
Mrs. W I L L 1 A M S. 137
eel of the news of the day, left the room ; when my mother-in-law faid to me, “ You look Sadly, Mrs. Williams ; I am afraid your too great piirfuit of pleafure will ruin your constitution, as well as your pocket.” “ My pursuit after pleafure!” I replied. Sure, Madam I mistake your fenfe of the word : If you mean by it diversions, or dissipation of any fort, I am certain, no one can purfiie them lefs than I do; ssnee in the Space of two years that I have been married, I have not been ten times in public ; nor am I fond of company ; for which reafon I Spend most of my time at home : Do me juf-tice, dear Madam, to believe that 1 Speak the truth.” Here the tlioughls of the falfe ideas She had conceived of my chara6ter, drew a . tear from my eye. She faid, “ How can that be, child When your huSband is already over head and ears in debt, you must be guilty of great extravagancy to make him So.” “ Alas Ma-(*am,” lanSwered, “ indeed lam not.*’ “ Nay don’t tell me So,” Said stie j Who iriade him build and involve himSelf in difficulties without end ? becaufe you took a fancy to a certain Spot of ground, and would have a houSe on it.” I was struck dumb at this charge, which I durst not deny, becauSe 1 Suppofed my hustiand to have been her informer : my Silence confirmed her in the belief of my indiScretion, and She went on : “ Befides, has he not been arrested for your debts to tradefmen ? Fye upon it, can you justify fo bad a condudl!” I affured her on my honor, “ That my huSband had never paid a debt for me Since we were married ; nor did I owe one in the w'orld.” She faid, “ No ! why for what ? and for w'hom, then, was he arrested ?”
—----------------------- 1
138 The M EM O I R S of
ed ?■’ I anfwered, T'hit, T don’t know, Madam, but it was I who paid the money ; though I am ignorant for what ; t!ie fum was one hundred pounds, but the hill was of a date prior to my marriage with your fon.” Site-leemed Surprized at what I Said, when, laying her hand upon my arm, “ For God’s fake,” fays flip, “ my dear Mrs. Williams, don’t undeceive his father in this afF.itr ; if he knew that George had not given hiin a faithful account of -what he owed, I know'he would never forgive him ,*nay, I am perfuaded he w'ould diSinherit him. 1 always feared this would be the cafe, (continued fne ;) he never could be brought to a£I openly, and Sincerely, wdth his father.”
She then afked me, If that hundred pound w'as the only debt which he had Secreted from their knowledge ?” I replied, “ That J apprehend- ' od not, but that I was not poSitively Sure.”
She again intreated me to take the blame upon myfelf, I told her,That, hard as it was to I lofe the esteem of thofe, from whom I alpired to merit it, yet I would Sacrifice every feeling ot my heart, to my duty; and afSured her, that She might dej^end upon my implicit obedience to her commands.” “ But, (fays stie,) my dear, you fnould talk to George, and make him fenfi* ble of his errors. I know you can do what you will with him. Witnefs that dcvilifh houie, which he built to pleale you, So much against iris own inclination.” Here I Sighed, and, in-tieed, I almost lost my patience, to hear mylelf thus abufed, for crimes, the most foreign from my Jieart. I difliked the situation of the houfe ; the expence it had occasioned, was a continual
fource
Mrs. william ?.	139
Source of grief to me ; and the many mortifications it had brought on me, all together rn.ade it the objefit of my averSion. The old Lady liaeing thus vented her Spleen, and obferving that I looked melancholy, humanely changed the diicourfe, hv afking me, “ How her grand-lon did r” I told her he was cutting his teeth, and tar from well ihe then put a twenty pound bank note into my hands, desiring I would accept of it for her grandfon, exprefiing great concern at hearing he was not well. She then Said, “ She hoped her (on and 1 would come and Spend a month, or tv/o, in the country with her and Mr. IViUiams this Summer, and begged I would bring th.e child with me.” I assured her, “ T'hat I would wait on her with the greatest pleafure, but that I was not my own mistrefs. I begged She would mention it to her Son.” She replied. Smiling, “• Very well, my Dear, I will; but I am certain that if you Say yes, he won’t Say no.” Thus we parted, I had had a fatiguing day of it, I fancy youvriil allow, Adelaide, but it was not yet over.
*On my return home, I narrated to my huC band the converl'anon which had pasted between his mother and m.e ; at the end of which, “ Why did you undeceive her, (faid he,) about the hundred pounds t It would have been much better lor her to have thought you to blame, than to fuster her to torment me, as ssie now will do, to know who I owed it to, and for what.” I replied, “ That I did not t hink I merited his reproaches upon that head.”. He immediately reafiumed his good nature, andanfwered, “No more do you, indeed, my Dear, and I acknowledge
140 The MEMOIRS OF ledge myfelf in the wrong ; but I hate that old woman’s implacable curioSity. 1 go and Spend two months with them in the country ! I would go to the devil as foon : I'o dream half the day over dirty cards, and a farthing candle, at penny quadrille, or elfe lay your prayers and liear the old man read homilies, or perliaps a Sermon ; no, d—n me if Ido !” I obferved, “ That it was Sometimes necessary to Sacrifice our inclinations to our duty, and that, I ap[jrehended, a refuSal of complying with this their obliging invitation, might occaSion a quarrel; and that, in that cafe, the world in general would certainly be on the fide of the old people.” He replied, “ He did not care a pinch of Snuff for the world, or its cenfure.” I told him, “ He would think otherwise when he was in a better temper, (and, with a Smile, added,) you cannot be r.roSs, my Dear, but you are now only negatively good humoured.”
The next day we went into the country: I found the houSe quite finilhed and elegantly fur-nifhed, the ground about it was a little in disorder, but from the arrangement of that was to proceed Mr. Williams\ amuSement during the Summer. Here we passed many agreeable hours; he diverted himSelf all day with his work-people, and I with my books and child ; in the evenings we met with pleafure, and passed them in mutual good humour and chearfulnefs. My huf-band, as I have already obServed, did not want understanding, nor was that understanding unimproved, but it was unfortunately miSapplic-d. It uas impoSTible to fix him, even for a moment, on any topic, which was relative either
to
Mrs. WILLIAMS. 141
to his condu0: or interest; on all others no body reaSoned better, or would listen with more attention, to the arguments of others.
In the enjoyment of this delightful Scene of domestic felicity I Spent two months, the happiest of my life ; when, one morning I received a card, with Sir William and Lady Beaufordf and the Mifs Beaufords compliments to Mr. Williams and myfelf, and, if we were not engaged, they would wait upon us the next day. The anfwer was, that we Should be glad of their company. Upon enquiry I found they lived but halt a mile distant from our houfe. I had heard their names often, and was acquainted with Some of their connexions in town, but I had never Seen them. I was extremely Sorry to find my Scheme of retirement thus interrupted, by people I knew nothing of, and who, from their Vi-1, cinity to us, might, and probably would, prove very troublefome neighbours; how’cver, in tin’s, as well as in most circumstances in lite, happi-nels was to give way to good breeding. The next day, in the afternoon, they came; Sir William Seemed to be a good natured, well behaved man, his wife an old coquette, who was fighting against nature, in order to appear young and handfome, the former of which Ihe had certainly once been, but the latter never; her eldest daughter (for there were two of them) was a fine tall girl, with a large pair of languilhing blue eyes, and a complexion like white (attin ; her hair was what is generally called red, but I think might, with more propriety, be termed yellow, fince it was exaUly the colour of an orange ; she had large bones, and was full chested ;
142 The xMCMOIRS or
ed; her voice wai^ So Soft and low, that it was with difficulty one heard what the Said ; and, in Short, her whole behaviour befpoke the most tender and romantic turn of mind. Her younger Sister was quite the reverSe of her, both in figure and manners. I found that both the young Ladies played upon the harpfichord, which, as there was luckily ofie in the room, I kept them as constantly to as I could, during the afternoon, in order to Supply the want of con- i verfation : My Lady was fufficiently occupied in adjusting her own graces, and in admiring the talents of her daughters. To my inexprefllide joy, the evening came at last, and they took their leaves, faying, “ They hoped we fliould be good neighbours.” Mils Beauford afked me, “ If I loved walking?” I told her, “ Not much:” “ But you do, Mr. Williams hxd. file to him ; he anfwered, “ Yes, it was one of his principal amufements in the country.” “ I am glad of it. She replied, for 1 doat upon strolling about the fields ; and I can stiew you the fweetest Solitary woods and lanes about us, that you ever faw. Do, call upon me one morning, fays She, and 1 will carry you to them.” Mr. Williams bowed his thanks for her obliging offer, and away they went. 1 had forgot them ahnost before they drove out of the court-yard, had not my hufband called them back to ray idea, by Saying, “ What a fine fubjeSt that eldest Mifs Beauford is, (if a man thought it worth his while) to make a fool of. The girl’s iiead is turned with Novels and Romances, which have fo Softened her mind, and enervated her under-, standing, that file would fall into the first maffs
arms
Mrs. williams.	143
■arms who would open them to receive her.”—
“ It would he a great pity She Should, I replied, for ihe really is a fine girl, and may make Some worthy man happy in a wife, when (he has lived long enough in the world to judge, from lier own observation of men and manners, how’fallacious, as well as pernicious, thofe Sentiments are, which she has imbibed from authors, who ‘ Seem only to write, in order to pervert and de-I bauch, the youthful mind; whilst, under the mash of the most refined, and delicate Sentiments, they infinuate the loofest morals.”
Hold, my Dear, cried Mr. Williams, you are absolutely preaching a Sermon upon the occaSi-on ; the young fellows of this age, let me tell you, would be extremely Sorry that you should put your thoughts into print. Since the modern Novel writers have indiSputably been of more fervice to them, than all the ProcurcSTes in the kingdom ever w',ere.” I anfwered, “ That they had nothing to fear from me, but that I wished an abler pen than mine would undertake the lash.”
My hushand ufed Sometimes to ride out on horfe-back in a morning. One day, on his return from one of thefe little excurSions, he told me, “ That lie had called upon Sir William Beauford, and that Mifs Beauford would dine with me the next day.” I Said, “ Did you invite her, my Dear?” He aniwered, “ Not I, faith; she invited herfelf.” “ I am Sorry for it,
1 replied, becaufe my turn of mind is fo very unlike iier’s, that I am afraid she will not Spend the day agreeably with me.” “ O I Said he, she loves walking, and running about the garden,
144 The ME M O I R S o f den. So I will take care that she shall not be very troublefome to you
My poor little boy continued to be very puny ; the pain of his teeth brought on a flow fever, which no medicine had hitherto removed :
I trembled daily for his life. Mr. Williams feemed, by fits, to be much touched at the child’s Situation. I was now breeding, and, consequently, not very well, and my Spirits were I much depressed by the fickneSs of my poor lit- I tie infant. When Mifs Beauford arrived, ac- I cording to appointment, she was shewn up in- I to my dreshng-room, where, after the uSual I compliments, she exclaimed, “ What a happy I woman you are, Mrs. Williams, to poflfeSs So I delightful a retreat as this is, with the amiable I partner of your heart ! and, continued she, I turning herfelf about, you have got a library, I too, I fee ! Good God ! you would lofe by ex- I changing your earthly Paradife for a heavenly I one!” I anfwered, “ That she deceived her- I Self, if she thought that there was any Such I thing to be found on earth as perfect felicity, I and that Site would ceaSe to envy me, when she I knew what were a mother’s feelings on the ap- I preaching lots of her only child.” Juft as I I fpoke, nurfe entered the room, with little George ■
• in her arms, whofe pale countenance, and ema- ■ dated figure, too well explained the meaning of ■ what I had been faying. She looked at the boy ■ with concern ; and faid, “ Indeed, I am very ■ forry to fee Maftgr look fo ill.” Mr. Williams ■ now joined us, and, with his ufual iprightlinds, I Soon dishpated the gloom which the poor child’s I indifpoSition had flung over our converfation; I
Mrs. WILLIAMS.	145
he talked agreeable nonSenfe for Some time, and then propofed a walk to the young Lady, who readily accepted the offer; they went together into the garden. I did not fee them again till dinner was on the table; when I thought Mifs looked a good deal fluttered, and her cloaths feemed to shew that she had been at romps. I rallied her on the diforderof her cap, and handkerchief; she Said, “ Mr. Williams was a provoking creature, for he had rolled her upon the graSs, and plagued her to death.’* I anfwered. Smiling, “ It is your own fault, Mifs Beauford ; for no man romps with a young Lady, unlcSs he is first convinced that she likes it.” She drank tea with us, and then walked home; Mr. Wil-hams attended her thither.
On his return from conducing her to her father’s, I t()ld him, that I thought he should be very cautious how he beliaved to Beauford-, as he had hirnfelf obferved how fufceptible to the tender paffions the romantic turn of her mind had made her. I laid, it would be cruelty in him to play upon her w’eaknefs; and added, ** I know too well how irreSistible you are, my Dear, when you try to pleafe, not to feel for Mifs Beauford : I am, however, thoroughly perfuaded, that you are incapable of fo bafe a thought as that of dishonouring her ; and I hope you are equally fo of engaging her young and inexperienced mind into a hopelefs, not to fay an Unjustifiable passion, which must rob her of peace, and be a Source of perpetual remorfe to yourfelf.” He replied, “ My pretty preacher, 1 would not, intentionally, do an injury to any perfon living; but when a fine girl shews me VoL. li.	C	that
146 TheMEMOIRSof	I
that she chuSes to be kissed, I muss kiSs her.”—
This was his manner of arguing, upon all fub-je£ls which regarded his conducst. I, therefore, changed the conversation, by ashing him,
“ If he had not heard lately from his parents and when he intended that we should go to their houfe for a month, or two, according to pro-mife ?” He replied, carlefsly, “ O, yes, I had a letter from my mother a fortnight ago .* did not I shew it you ? wherein she presses us much to come to her: lanSwered her a few days ago, alSuring her, that we would have waited upon I my father, and her, with the utmoss plcafure, I but that you was with child, and that not being I very well, I did not think it Safe for you to take I a journey in your prefent condition; I added, I that George was very ill, and that I could not I think of leaving you in Such a Situation.” “ You I are a ssrange man, my Dear. (I replied,) How	I
unmercifully you load me with your faults : I	f
begin to apprehend that I shall Smk under the f weight oi them ; they have already, I fear, in- I tirely robbed me of the esseem of your parents I and will, in the end, indubitably Smk me in that I of the rest of my friends and acquaintance ; and I' when all the world forfakes me, will you	f
(faid I pathetically,) continue to love me ! You f ought, I think. Since it is to Screen you, that I f thus bear a character So foreign, in every refpe6t f to my own.” “ Will 1 love you ! (he anfwer- |i ed, with vivacity, catching me in his arms,) yes, f I do, I evef muss love you : you are the God- I® defs of my idolatry ; but what ssgnifies what I® thofe old people think. So they do but die, and leave us their money; I wonder, my Dear, you I,
can V
Mrs. WILLIAMS.	147
can make them of So much importance, as to care a farthing what their opinion of you is.** I Said, “ That I thought it my duty to refpe6f his parents, and that the meriting their esteem, and approbation of my conduist, had been one of the most ardent wi(hes of my heart; and I mustconfefs, that I relinquished thefe my pre-tenstons to their friendihip, with the most inex« prestible reluQ;ancy, and regret.*’ “ My Dear, (he replied,) you don’t know the old folks, therefore it is in vain to combat your prejudices ; fo faying, he fat himfelf down to the harpstchord, and began playing of a jig.
A few days after this, my eldest brother came UomOxfordy to Spend a month with us. Mr. Williams, under the pretext that I had now got Some body to bear me company, was perpetually from home. I perceived it with the most fen-fible grief, and had Some fufpicions that Mifs Beauford was the thief, who had stole him from me ; this thought alarmed both my love and vanity. However, I did my endeavours to Subdue the latter, as well as to moderate the ex-tefs of the former : I therefore determined to make no enquiries into the courfe of his peregrinations, lest by So doing, I Should increafe my Sufpicions; and, in the mean time, I refolved to hope the best. In this state of mind, I, one evening, propofed to my brother, a little ride out in the chariot, which, as it was very fine weather, he readily accepted. As I was getting into the carriage, the footman aSked me, “ Where 1 would pleafe to goto?” I told him, “ That the coachman might carry us where he would, fo he chofe a pleafant ride for C 2	us;
5148	The memoirs of
us; adding, that when we came to an even anti ssiady Spot of ground, I would pull the string, and get out and walk a little;” So away we went; but where to, I knew not, till, coming into a wood, I perceived a very neat fmall thatched cottage. I admired both the houfe, and its sttuation ; So pulling the string, I got out of the chariot, in order to take a nearer view of this pretty rural Iiabitation ; I walked stov\'ly on, leaningiupon my brother’s arm, and moralizing on the charms of industry rewarded by content, and retirement ; when all of a Sudden, ■I faw two people turn Short, out of a narrow lane, and with their backs to us, enter the cottage I was then taking a lurvey of. 1 thought I knew them to be my hufband and Mifs Beau^ ford'y when my brother exclaimed, “ Look, Sister, there is Mr. Williams^ and the young Lady who fo often comes to your houfe ! let us go and Surprize them ; they won’t think of meeting with us here.” I recollefted myfelf from the reverie this incident had thrown me into, enough to anfwer him, “ No, my Dear, it is not them ; you have forgot that Mr. Wil-Hams went this morning to London about busi-nefs.” He made me no reply, but I plainly faw', he was convinced that his conjectures were right. I then turned back again, and met the chariot, which, as Soon as I was Seated in, I ordered them to drive to Sir William Beauford’s. Her Ladyfhip received me with her ufual apologies for being in Such a defhabille. I afked, “ How MiSs Beauford did ?” not Seeing her with her mother. “ She is gone to London, replied my Lady, to Spend the day with her
aunt;
r
Mrs. WILLIAMS. 149
aunt; and she will be vastly lorry, I am Sure, not to have been at home, when you honored us with a call.” I faid, “ That I should certainly have been very glad to have Seen her, but that I had been out on an airing, and only just stopped at her Ladyship*s door, to alk how they all did, for that I could net stay a moment.” So faying, I took my leave, perfe£Ily confirmed in my fuipicions, that my hushand and Mifs Beauford were the identical perfons I had Seen go into the farm-houfe together. My brother and I then returned home : He w'as thoughtful, and fo was I ; but I endeavoured to hide my uneaSinefs from him as much as possible ; and faid to him with careleffnefs, “ Charles my Dear, don’t tell your brother Williams XhviX you thought you faw him in our walk, this afternoon, becaufe I am Sure it was not him.” He replied, “ I will not mention it, I assure you. Sister} nor had I any intention of fo doing.’" Between nine and ten my libertine came home, lively, good-humoured, and agreeable, as ufual; He afked my brother and I, what we had been doing all day ? which we told him; and, in return, he gave us an account how he had fpent his time, in running after people he could not meet with ; and ended with complaining of the stink and dust of London^ where, however, I was well convinced he had never been that day.
You must remember, my dear Adelaide^ the wile resolution I bad taken, of ceaSing to love my hushand, upon the Scene which had passed at the fpunging-houfe : I must therefore beg you to remark, that I had never once attempted to pul this stoical maxim into prasilice Irom that C 3	time
150 The memoirs of time to this I am now Speaking of, when the fame idea prefented itSelf to my imagination, as Springing from the fame caufe, with Some aggravations, however, in the circumstances. I loved my hufband with the utmost rendernefs, and could not bear the lofs of his afFe£Iion. My heart was torn by thofe two cruel fiends. Grief and Jealoufy ; however, I cautiousty concealed them in my own breast, being perfe£sty per-fuaded, that all remonstrances on my part would never stem the torrent of unruly passion in him, but, on the contrary, perhaps increafe it; as difficulties being thrown in the way, have prolonged many an attachment, which would inevitably have died of Satiety, had it been left to uninterrupted enjoyment. I found, upon an examination of myfelf, that I could fubmit to partake the perfon of my hufband with Mifs Beaufordy but not his heart: My fear of loSing that made me exaggerate her merit, whilst it depreciated my own, and drove me almost into a state of defpair. I did not remain long, however, in this cruel Situation, before the difeafe itfelf produced a remedy ; for the first time my rival came to fee me (after I was confirmed in my conje£itmes of the irregularity of her conduct) fhe did not appear to me half So formidable as my disordered imagination had painted her; She was funk in my elleem, and therefore lessened in my eyes. I felt that Superiority which virtue ever has over vice, and I looked down upon my hufband, and her, with pity, not unmixed with contempt : The aukward manner in which they endeavoured to hide their Intimacy, by wearing an exterior of affe6led re-
ferve,
Mrs. WILLIAMS. 151	'
Serve, made them appear ridiculous to me ; tl^e	;
many Soft looks which I perceived her steal at him, and the air of inSolent negligence with	|
which his replied, gave eafe to my heart, Since	I
I judged from thence of the nature of his connexion with her, and confequently loreiaw, that it would not be of a long duration. I was determined to Shorten it, by giving them every	'
opportunity they could with for of being toge-	|
ther; and my plan had the deSired fuccefs. For	i
fome time before we returned to town for the	j
winter, my huSband was almost always at home, nor did Mifs Beauford ever come to our houfe unaccompanied by her mother or Sister, and then Mr. Williams always contrived to be out of the way.
A few days before I left the country. Lady and her two daughters came to take leave of me, as they did not intend being in London that winter : I was furpriz.ed at the alteration I perceived in the eldest girl; (he was pale and thin, and wore an air of melancholy and deje6sion on her countenance, which too plainly indicated the diforder of her mind. I could not help obferving to her, that I thought stie looked ill; She Said, “ She appreliendcd that (he was in a confirmed confumption, and She was very willing to die when it pleafed God.”
Her mother and fifler Seemed much concerned at her indifpofiticn : I advifed them to carry her to the Soutii of France-, which my Lady Said She intended doing early in the fpring. Whilst I Surveyed the wreck before me of a fine girl in the bloom of youth, I was Softened to compaf-fion, and in that moment I forgot all stie liad C 4	made
152 The memoirs op made me Suffer, and my heart bled for her * She read my fentlments in my eyes, when catching one of my hands, and prelling it affectionately to her breast, she Said, in a Soft voice, vmilst the tear dropped from her eye, “ You are too good, too amiable, my dear Mrs. Williams ! thus to feel for me, and to pity me.”
When they were gone, I obferved to Mr. Williams how dreadfully Mifs Beauford looked ; and added, “ how extremely forry I was to fee her fo ill.” He replied, “ She is a foolish girl ; and as there are fo many of that fort in. the world, she will not be miffed amongst the croud if she should die.” I was hurt at this anfwer, asit indicated anobduracyand inhumanity which shocked me ; and I faid, with Some quickneSs, “ Fye, my Dear, if I did not believe that your tongue now injures the fentiments of your heart, I should judge you totally divested of all fenSibility, and consequently should have a very bad opinion of you ; but I added, I am perfuad-ed you do not think as you Ipeak.” To this reprimand he made no reply, but changed the difeourfe.
In a few days we went to London. My poor child continued drooping every day, a stow fever confumed his little frame, and in lefs than a fortnight after our arrival in town, he died on my lap, in a convulSion fit. I was now fix months gone with child, when the shock of lofing my little George flung me into labour. I was brought to bed of a girl, who lived only a few hours, and it was apprehended, by all thofe who attended me, that I should not long Survive her : But it pleafed Providence to referve me
for
Mrs. W I L L I a xM S. 153
for greater misfortunes than any I had yet expe-rienced, in order, I prefume, to teach my heart the fallacy and dangerof all earthly attachments, and to place my affe6Iions, and hopes, on him who cannot deceive.
During my illnefs, which was long; I frequently alked, if my father or mother-in-law had Sent to enquire after me, and was always anfwered in the negative ; I was furprized at it, and enquired of Williams, if he could guefs at the reafon for this their apparent neglc6t of me. He told me, “ That, on their arrival in town, they had wrote him a line, requesting to fee him, declaring, at the fame tirpe, that they would never fee me more.’’ , He Said, “ He had waited upon them, gonclusting that I did not care a farthing v/h'ether they,'w^re angry or pleafed at me.” I allured him, pf, the contrary ; but he only laughed, and,;Said, “ He knew I had a better taste than to like Such company; and, as to the rest, it was all anfwered, by his keeping on good terms with them ; that one of us, he obferved, must be in the wrong, and, therefore, it was Safest for me to he the perfon, as their thinking him to be So, might be of fatal confequence to us both.” I was obliged to fubmit, to what I could not remedy; it gave me, however, infinite concern, to be the object of detestation to his parents.
I have already remarked, that my hufband’s income depended upon the will of his father, who had only promifed the continuance of it, as long as he should behave well, and be thought deferving of it ; and this was the reafon why I could never exculpate my Self of the many heavy C 5	aiuL
154 TheMEMOIRSof
and unjust charges laid against me, for fear, lest by regaining their good opinion, I might loSe my bread, and, what was ten thouSand times worfe, I should have deprived my hulband of his.
One day as I was fitting alone in my drdTmg-room, ruminating on the feveiity of my fate, a Servant came and told me, “ That two ill-looking men wore below, and afked ior his master ; that on his telling them that he was not at home, they desired to fee me.” I bid him shew them into the parlour, and fay, that I would be with them in a minute. My heart fluttered, I did not know why; however, 1 w'ent immediately dow'n stairs. On my entering the room, one of the fellows advanced towards me j “ Madam, Said he, I have an execution against Mr. WiL Jlatns.” The air and manner oi the man frightened me; and! anfwered, trembling, “ An execution! pray, Sir, what is that?”—“ It is only a power to Seize your goods and furniture, he replied, for the ule of the creditor, unleis you find out Some other means of fatisfying him” —“ And who is the creditor ?” I demanded. “ He is a rpan who keeps a livery-stable,” replied the fellow. “ Do you know what is the ium for which you have this execution ?” Said I “ It is Something above two hundred pounds,” he replied. I then alked, “ What was to be done?” He laid, “ Nothing, Madam; only that w e must live in this houle till the money is paid ; that is all.
1 leave you, Adelaide^ to judge what must have.been my situation of m;nd, at this period of time. I had no more Bank bills to extricate
n\y
Mrs. WILLIAMS.	i55
my hulband with, nor any friend, to whom I could apply for relief in this emergency. I therefore deSired the men to Sit down in the parlour, and ordered the Servant to tell his master, when he came home, that I deSired to Speak to him, in my dressing-room, about particular bu-stnefs, and not to mention to him the fellows being in the houSe. TheSe orders given, I retired into my own appartmenf, in a perturbation of mind which would be difficult to defcribe,
In lefs than half an hour, Mr, Williams entered my room ; and, being ignorant of what had paSTed, appeared with his natural eafe and chearfulnefs: He started, however, and Seemed Surprized and concerned, on perceiving the vi-Sible marks of uneaSineSs, which were painted in my face ; and, with a tender eagei nefs, he alked me the caufe of it. I replied, by afking him, “ If he had not Some debts, Vvihich he . was apprehenSive might bring him into difficulties,, if not immediately discharged ?” He an-fwered, Yes, he had debts, as who was without ? but none that were not eaSily paid.”
I then told him, “ That, as that was the cafe,
I begged he would go into the parlour, and discharge two men, who had taken possession of the houfe, on the Suit of a fellow who keeps a livery-stabk, for the Sum of two hundred pounds, and upwards.*’ He stared at me, and Seemed disconcerted a good deal at this piece of intelligence ; but recovering himfelf instantly, he Said,
“ The fellow is a rafeal; it is not a week ago. Since he promifed not to trouble me for the money then, walking backwards and forwards , in the room, he struck his hand upon his forehead
156 The MEMOIRSof
head, and stamping with one foot, he exclaimed, ** This is d—mn’d unlucky, for I have not a farthing in my pocket, nor shall have, till my father pays me a quarter, which is not due this month yet. The old villain will be the ruin of me, frorn his diabolical attachment to his money j there will be no luch thing as getting a farthing out of him, I know, he is fo curfeuly covetous.’' I'o this Soliloquy I made no anfwer; v/hen, turning to me, he Said, “ The Scoundrels did not frighten you, iny Dear, I hope.” I replied, “ Not much ; but that I begged he would find a means of making them quit the houSe as Soon as poshhle.” “ O 1 yes, yes, that I will do, he anSwered, with an embarialT-ed air ; but we will dine first, if you pleafe, for I am hungry ; and, apropos^ whilst the footman lays the cloth, I will go and talk to them a little ” So Saying, he went out of the room.
I could not help lamenting, upon this occasion, the fatal conSequenqes which flow from a modern education ; in which ceconomy, and a strifif Senfe of probity, in paying the industrious tradesman, are looked upon as Plebeian virtues, unbeccnriing a Gentleman to put in practice. From this amazingly abSurd, and dangerous prejudice, proceeded all the inextricable difficulties, into which my hushand precipitated himlelf and me ; and, in the end, drove him to that last, and dreadful reSource, the gaming-table, in hopes there, of procuring the means tofupport his extravagancy. But to my story.
Mr. ^7///cwj returned to me, with a Serene countenance. Saying, “ That he had wrote to his father, requesting him to advance the next
quarter
Mrs. W I L L I A M S. 157 quarter, upon his receipt ; for, (added he,) I know the old hunks will lend me the money on no other condition.’" I remarked, that in that cafe it would be neceffary for us to lesten our expences, for halt a year at least, in order to repair the breach which this affair had made in our income. ‘‘ Indeed, my dear, I faid, I will do every thing on my part for this purpofe, as I find mytelf utterly incapable of fustaining repeated stiocksof this nature; tor, believe me I would rather want the necessaries ot lile, than injure any one, or lay myfelt open to the infults of Such wretches as thele myrmidons of the law are.” I entreated him to pity my fenfibility, carefully to avoid, for the future, the involving me in difficulties, which my ill state of health, i and extreme tendernefs for him, rendered me unable to Support. He kindly promiled, that this Ihould be the last affair ot the kind 1 Should ever meet with. Alter dinner, he was called out of the room, when he received the money from his father, on which the debt was paid, and the men fentaway.
During the courfe of this winter, I obferved that many odd locking people came frequently to enquire for Mr. Williams, and Sometimes, when he was at home, he would chide the Servant for faying he was fo. Thefe circumstances alarmed me; I feared thofe people came for the payment of their refpedive bills, and I one day ventured to afk him, if I conjetiured right? He made me an evasive anfwer, which confirmed my fufpicions. He now began to lofe his ufual gaiety; he grew tenacious and morofe ; home dilpleafed him ; he could not bear it unlels
with
158 Th£ memoirs of
with company ; he Seemed to stun my eyes, and carefully avoided being alone with me, as much as was polSible ; he uSed to come home long after I was in bed, and, consequently, he rofe long after I was up in the morning. When I tenderly enquired into the cauSe of his ill humour, and feemingdiscontent, adding my apprehenlionr lest Istould have been fo unfortunate, as,through inadvertency, to have given him offence: He would anfwer, peevistly, “ Pray, Madam, don’t teaze me. Cannot a man be grave, but he must be out of humour ?” Thus Silenced, 1 had no confolation left on earth, but the company of my dear Sophie \ ste ufed frequently tocome and Spend the day with me; and, no dtubt, ste obServed that my hustand was never at home, though ste never enquired after him, farther than by alking how he did : This referve proceeded, I imagined, from my never having communicated to her any part of thofe griefs which inwardly corroded and preyed upon my breast;! knew ste could administer no relief to my difeafe, why then wound her gentle bofom with the recital of my afflidcions ? BeSides, there was another consideration which tied my tongue; this was, the dread that my relations Should become acquainted with the whole of Mr. Wil-liamfs ill conduSl. I was confcious that I had no body to blame but tnyfelf, for all my prefent misfortunes; I therefore determined to bear them in Silence, with fortitude, and reSignation; the world attributed my dejection of Spirits, and love of retirement, to the ill state of my health which had never been perfectly re-establisted Since my last lying-in, and the lofsof my little boy.
I now
Mrs. W I L L I A M S. 159
I now very rarely faw my father; he never came to fee me , and when I went to vifit him, he received me fo coldly, as almost broke my heart. He condemned my condufl, with regard to my hulband’s parents; who were never tired of publilhing, how ill I behaved, in not going to fee them in the country ; adding, that I even would not let their fon fee them, but when it was not in my power to hinder him. This, joined to the many instances they gave of my extravagancy, made my father have a very bad opinion ol my difcretion, and, no doubt, alarmed his fears, of my being returned again upon his hands. I had, as I have already Said, no anfwer to make to thefe unjust accufations laid to ray charge, unlefs I openly quarelled with my hiifband ; fo, by Silence, I tacitly acknowledged myfelf guilty; and, 1 believe, almost every body thought me fo. Thus, unfupported by any thing but felf approbation, andconfcious innocence, 1 struggled at once against difappoint-ed love, rebated tendernefs, negLfled friend-stiip, with all their train of woes, not to mention a broken fortune, and want of health.
The Summer now advanced, and I hoped to find more eafe in retirement, than 1 could do in the noife and bustle of London, where Mr. ^F/7-h’flwj-continually crowded his houfe with people, to whom I was obliged to be civil, though they were, justly, the objedls of my detestation, as to their Society I chiefly owed the irregular con-du0.of my hulband.
Before I left town, I went to take leave of my \\nc\e Boldby ; (my aunt was gone to Scar^ borough he received me with a look exprestive
of
i6o The MEMOIRS of of uncommon tendernefs, which I fancy I owed to his compafTion, on looking at my emaciated figure ; for in truth, grief had almost worn me . to the bone. Finding him thus Softened, by pity, towards me, I took that opportunity of expresting the ardent defire I had, of taking my Sister with me into the country, there to Spend the Summer j but, at the Same time, I told him, “ That I durst not alk Such a favour of my father; and, therefore, ventured to beg, that he , would be So kind as to obtain it for me ” He very obligingly replied, “ That he would uSe his best endeavours for that purpoSe ; “ adding, “ I don’t think your father will be So cruel, my Dear, as to refuSe your request ; eSpecially when I tell him, that you look as if you had already one foot in the grave.’* Here the good Gentleman put his handkerchief to his eyes, in order to hide the falling tear ; mine flowed plentifully, in gratitude for his fenSibility. We parted ; and, two days after, Sophie wrote me word, that my uncle had prevailed, and that (he was ready to accompany me to----------, whenever I pleaSed.
'I'he next week Mr. Williams w'ent to Neiv^ market^ and from thence he was logo elSewhere. Sophie and I went into the country the day he Set out, where we Spent most part of the Summer alone. On Mr. WiUiams'‘% return home, he behaved extremely politely to me, but without the Smallest Spark of affediion. Let any one, who truly loves, place themSelves, in idea, in the predicament I now was, and then let them tell me, if there is a torture on earth equal to defpiSed love. My hulband was very Seldom at home, though he had lost his fait neighbour,
MiSs
►
Mrs. WILLIAMS. i6i
M\h Beauford, who was gone, with ail the family, into the South of France. Sophie and I Spent the Summer between our books and our work; Sometimes we took a walk, but not often, as I had hardly strength to stand upon my ^ legs. Thus my time would have past tolerably, had I not chetilhed a vulture in my breast, v/orSe than the Promethean one, which incestantly gnawed my heart, and baniShed peace from thence.
The winter now approached, and on our uSual time of going to town, I alked Mr. Williams^ ** When he intended that we stiould Set out for that place ?” He anSwered, Are you in a hurry, my Dear togo to	I thought
you preferred the country.” I told him, “ So I did, and that I had only alked the question in order to prepare for our removal, and not from any destre I had to return to town.”—** Well, then, (fays he, with a good natured fmile) I will indulge you with Six weeks more of the country, and I wifh (continued he, in a tenderer accent,) that I could procure to my Charlotte every with of her heart, as taSily as I can do this, and then ste Should be without a want.”
I looked at him aitentively as he fpoke ; his air was affeQionate ; both his words, and the manner in which he uttered tliem, penetrated my heart with Surprize and tenderneSs. The transition was too Sudden for refleflion, I therefore gave way to SenSation, and, bursting into a flood of tears, I exclaimed, “ Cruel man ! w'hy do you thus Sport with my broken heart ?” He took me in his arms and prestIng me to his boSom, wiped off my tears, faying, “ CompoSe
yourSelf,
i62 Th e xVI E M OI R S o r
yourfelf, my dearest Charlotte ; believe me,-your too great fenSibility is the ruin of your constitution.” Thus a kind word and look from my hustand, levelled to the ground, in one ^ moment, all the fortifications I had beenraifing by the help of philofophy, for a year or more, between him and my aficffions. I had vainly flattered myfeif, tliat the evident indifference he bad Shewn for my perfon, together with his total negledf of concealing any part of its efleds from me, had in fome meafure, abated the ardour of my paflTion for him : Alas, how had I deceived myfdf I I now found the full conviction of my own w'eaknefs, in experiencing the extent of his power. His behaviour was not only attentive, but kind, during the fix weeks destined for our refidence in the country ; when that time being expired within a day or two, he and I walking alone in the garden, he pressed my hand gently, and looking at me with eyes full of grief, stiame, and contrition, he Said, “ My lovely girl, I have been much to blame in my condu£t through life, and eSpecially with regard to you ; you deferved, CbarlottCf a much better hufband than i have been to you ; you are, indeed, the best of women, and I fear I am the worst of men : You do not know halt my faults, (continued he ;) but if you really still love me, as I flatter myfeif you do, you will accept of my repentance, and, from an excels of guodnefs, perhaps, pardon the past errors of my life. Know, then, (continued he) that you have no longer a fioufe in London which you can pr.flibly go ; I lost my money at Newmarkety and was obliged to fell the furniture
Mrs. W I L L I A M S. 163	|
ture of it to pay my debts of honor, (they, you	,
know, admit of no delay :) This is not all, for	I
I am So much involved, that I must Shortly quit	|
this houfe too, and go over to France, or ellel	I
stiall run a rifque of waiting for my father’s . death in a gaol.” Here he paufed and looked	I
stedfastly at me—I was Silent for Some moments ;	i
nstonistiment had struck me dumb; but recol-	[
li.«51:ing myfe4f as well as I could, I told him,	'
“ 'That as I had centered ail my hopes ofcarth-ly happinefs in the postestion of his love and	i!
friendship, whilst I prcferved them, my felicity was out of fortune’s reach. That as to my leaving my native country, all places must be rendered agreeable to me, fo he was but the	:!
companion of my travels. I added, with a Sigh,	!
that as I brought him no fortune, I had no right	I
to dire6I him in the difpofal of his; I assured	:|
him, that he should always find me the chearful companion of his misfortunes, and that I only	,
regretted being the innocent caufe of his prefent	j
difficulties, as he might, probably, have marri-	j
ed a woman, whoSe fortune would have Secured him an incofpe independent of his father, and, perhaps, have proved adequate to his wants.’^
Here he interrupted me, by flinging his arms about my neck, and, pressing me with ardor to his bofom, he called me his noble girl, his ge-	|
nerous friend, &c. In short, from this time	'
his whole behaviour was fo Sober, tender, and afl'edionate, that I was frequently tempted to rejoice at our ruin, w hich had given birth to fuch an alteration in his fentiments, as well as condu£l.
In
1^4 TheMEMOIRS op
In confequence of the informat'on Mr. WiT-liams had given me of the deplorable state of his finances, he, in a short time, brought down a man with him Irom London, who appraifcd all-the furniture, plate, Imen^ &c. which was in the houfe, and I fancy they were then fold to him at his own estimation of them ; this was done, I prefume, to Secure the money from his creditors, who might oiherwifehave Seized upon them as part of payment. I was now very bu-fy in packing up, and fending to a friend’s houfe, my own and hushand’s cloaths, (as we were very Soon to Set out for France,) when one evening, of a day that Mr. Williams had gone to town in the morning, Sophie and I were Sitting over the fire, conjeduring various caufes for his making it fo late before he returned home. How-' ever, as the night advanced, I grew excessively uneafy at not feeing him. My Sister was endeavouring, by every argument her imagination could invent, to calm my fears, when we heard Somebody ring at the great gate ; I started from my chair, and cried out, “ 'Ishere he is, at last !” and out I flew into the court-yard to meet him; but judge of my Surprize, when, instead of my hushand, I Saw Mr. Smith get out of his chariot. 1 must here deSire you to remark, that this good man was infinitely distiked by Mr. Williams, which, as he took no pains to conceal his Sentiments, Mr. Smith was no stranger to, for which reafon he veiy Seldom came to our houSe, and when he did, it was always at an hour when he apprehended he should find me alone, as he frequently declared, that his vifits were intended alone to me, for whom he pro-
fclSed
Mrs. WILLIAMS.	i6S
felTed to have a Sincere regard ; judge then of my Siirpriie, to fee him at that time of night.
I immediately concluded, that Some misfortune had befallen my hulband ; I therefore exclaimed, in a voice of terror, “ Good God, Sir,
what could have brought you to--, at eleven
o’clock at night ! Tell me the truth ! Is my hufband dead 1 Don’t Spare me ! I am inured to misfortunes, but fufpence is worfe than death.” Here Mr. Smith took hold of me, and Supporting my tottering frame, with the help oI Sophie conduSIed me into the parlour, where he Seated me and himfelf, and faid, “ No, my dear good Lady, your hufband is not dead ; he is very Safe and well, but not at liberty to wait upon you to night; don’t frighten yourfelf, he is in a good room, and has a warm bed to lay on, which is really, I think, more that he deferves ; in fliori, the cafe is this : He was arrested by his taylor this morning, who had, I find, got Some information of his intending to go abroad ; not content with this, the fellow has taken Some pains to inform his other creditors of his Suspicions, in confequence of which, there are twenty, other writs come out against him, and may, by to-morrow, be forty more, for any thing I know to the contrary. I'he young Gentleman, finding himfelf thus involved, without any means of redemption. Sent for me, begging me to go to his father, and fee what I could do for him : I did fo, but found old Mr. Williams very little inclined to releafe his fon ; he recapitulated all his former faults, and then flew out into a rage of inve6tives against you, Madam; nay, he did not hesitate to accufe you
as
j6S Th e me M O I R S o f
as being the author of all your hulband’s extravagancies, and Swore he would never do any thing more for him, till he parted with that woman, as he called you, faying, it was to no purpofe, for that the King’s revenue would not keep him out of debt, whilst you lived with him. I tried to justify you. Madam, by fa6f:s from my own knowledge, but I found his prejudices much stronger than my arguments ; mathematical demonstration is no proof to a man in a pafTion : In stiort, after a vast deal of intreaties on my part, and abufe on his, he faid to me. Well, Mr. Smith, I will now tell you my final resolution : Let George give liis wife an allowance, and be Separate from her, and on thefe conditions I will once more pay his debts. I here reprefented to him the injustice, not to fay iniquity, of Such a propofal; I defired him to refledl, how Hcred the ties of matrimony were, and faid, that by being the caufe«of Separating man and wife, he would a6f against the laws of
Christianity, as well as thofe of humanity :----
He interrupted me, faying, You know my terms, and you may assure yourfelf, that I Shall never be brought to recede from them. Upon this we parted. Now, Madam, I must inform you, that the confequence of this conversation is, that there is a ralcal of a Lawyer, who is ordered to wait upon you to-morrow morning, with a letter from your hustaand, in which he will request you to feign giving your confent to the drawing up of articles of Separation, in order to procure his liberty, and, at the fame time, to assure you, that he only means to deceive his father by this stratagem ; and, as a proof of his sincerity, he will, no doubt, be lavilh in his professions of everlasting love and attachment to you.
Mrs. WILLIAMS.	167
Now, Madam, it is this circumstance -which brought me here at this unfeaSonable hour, in order to guard you against Surprize. I am come to counfel you as a father would do his	I
child, to intreat, (nay, if I may be allowed the	I
exprestion,) to infist upon it, that you enter into no fuch agreement; if you do, be astured that it will be good in law, and you are ruined.
Don’t let the affection you have for your huf-band, get the better of the justice you owe to yourfelf; and Suffer not yourfelf to be intimidated either by his threats or reproaches, I am convinced, from my own observation, both of your diSpoSition and conduct, that you are the very reverSe of what you have been represented to be, by Some malicious perSon, to your father-in-law ; and, without your telling me fo, I can plainly perceive that you have Sacrificed yourfelf, in order to exculpate your hufband, in which I admire your genenerostty, but cannot commend your prudence. And now, my dear young Lady, (continued Mr, Smithy taking hold of one of my hands,) have courage, their ma- ^ chinations can never hurt you ; if you will only refolve to be a friend to yourfelf, all examination of, or enquiries into, your conduit, can only redound to your honor, and conlequently ex-pofe themfelves; your hufband knows this, and therefore will never attempt to procure a Separation against your will; you have therefore, the power m yourov/n hand. Rest assured, that if his father finds there is no possibility of bringing you into a compliance with his terms, he will give him his liberty upon your own.”
During
i68 The MEMOIRS OF
During this long difcourfe, I had had time to recover from the furprize into which Mr.
arrival had thrown me ; but then the fub-je61: of his converlation had kept my fpirits in a continual agitation. I, however, assumed strength enough to thank my generous friend, for his truly parental care of me. I tried, by every expreiSion I was mistreSs of, to prove the fenfe I had of his goodnefs; but, alas ! how inadequate was all I Said, to the vivacity of thofe Sentiments of gratitude which glowed in my heart towards my friend and proteQor ! I told Mr. Smith, “ That I was certain, nothing but the being drove to the greatest distrefs, could have induced my hufband to give his confent to part with me, though it was in appearance only; adding, that I hoped he did not think fo ill of Mr. Williams^ as to fuppofe him capable of laying a Snare tor me, in order to deceive me.’*
He anf'vered, “ Your opinion, and mine. Madam, of Mr.	are very different, there-
fore I beg to be excuSed, if I decline anfwcring the question; it is Sufficient that you don’t put it in his power to deceive you, and is all that is necessary at preSent.” Air. Smith then observed, that it was late, and begged leave to retire to his chamber. Saying, “ Good night, my dear young Lady ; you are like to have a trou-bleSome guest of me ; for I (hall not leave this houfe, till I See you extricated out of your pre-fent difficulties ” I was So struck at the benevolence of this good man, that I could only Say, in broken accents, “ Good night; and may j the Almighty ever blefs you, for your goodnefs j to me!"’	Sophie,
I
I
Mrs. WILLIAMS.	169	'
Sophie, who had been drowned in tears during the whole time of Mr. SmitKs difcourfe, now came to me, and, throwing her arms round my neck, fobbed out, “ O ! my dear, dearest Sister, how my heart bleeds for you ! Why can’t I bear your Sorrows?” I kindly thanked her for her fenSibllity of my misfortunes, but begged her not to enervate me, by her immode-	|
rate grief; affuring her, at the fame time, that	i
I was doubly wounded, by being the fubje6t of her afHiflion. I then begged her to compofe herfelf; obferving, “ That I hoped all would end well ; and that, fbould it happen otherwife,
I trusted that I fhould refign myfelf to the dif-penfations of Providence, who knew my strength much better than I did, and who was too merciful to Suffer the burthen to be too heavy for the	i
back.” I observed, “ That grief was lessened, by being Submitted to with patience and humility, whilst all the oppoSition brought, too frequently, by Self-will, against inevitable misfortune, only Served to increafe the torment, and,	,
consequently, to tear the constitution to pieces,	I
whilst it rendered us ridiculous in the eyes of our friends, and reprehenStble in thofe of our	;
Maker.”
Sophie looked at me with a countenance, in	I
which were strongly marked admiration and pity;
Thefe two Sentiments, at least the first of them, proceeded from her being a stranger to misfortune, or its effeds. I now wissied her a good	|
night, and she went to bed. I flung myfelf, with	;
mycloathson, upon mine.------Here, my dear
Adelaide, I must deSire you to Supply, what I	’
cannot defcribe, I mean, the Situation of my
VoL. II.	D	mind,	|
I!
lyo TheMEMOIRSof
mind, when. I was left alone, to revolve on all ‘ that had pasted that evening. [ now perceived, M thought I did So, that I was inevitably ruined, whether I obeyed my hufband, or followed the advice of my friend ; in complying with the former, I Saw plainly that I fhould lofe him for ever, and, at the fame time, dishonor myfclf; if, on the contrary, I purfued the counfel of the latter, I Ihouki, probably, difoblige Mr. WiF liams So far, as to make him withdraw that af-fei^ion for me, the lofs of which had already been So afilidling to me, and on which I let a value, which can only be estimated by thofe who have loved like me ; then I rejfleded, that, by refuSing to comply with his father’s conditions, and his request, I might, perhaps, be the caufe of his being immediately thrown into pri-fon. Torn to pieces by this cruel consti£l, the day appeared before I had clofed my eyes. I arofe, and changed my linen, and then went down stairs, where I met Mr. Smithy and my nster. ! perceived they obferved, with concern, that I had pasted a cruel night.
Mr. Smithy after breakfast, renewed the conversation of the U'st evening; he endeavoured, by every argument which friendship and reaSon could Suggest, to prove to me the necestlty there Was, of m,y giving a poSitive denial to every propoSal which could be made me, in regard to articles of Separation between me and Mr. IVil-liams: He reinarked, that as I had no marriage fetilenient, they would offer no more than a bare rtiaintenance, winch was, in faft, all I cbuld demand ; arid that by that means I Should renounce a fine estate, which must come to the Son at the father’s death ; and that then, if he
left
Mrs, W I L L I A M S. m
left me, without (hewing /. lawful caufe why he did So, I had a right to vlaim a Separate maintenance, proportionable (o his income, and not to what I brought him; whereas, if I accepted of one now, I could have no farther pretenSions or claim on his estate, let it become ever So large hereafter.” To this I anfwered, “ That the ’ consideration of money would never balance my choice, in the Smallest degree, as to which party I (hould ta/.e ; that it was the fear of loSing my huiband, and perhaps my honor, in the eyes of the world, which were the two great motives that would induce me to deny my confent to ssgn-ing the articles. I astured Mi Smith, that I Set Vi-ry little value upon what the world tailed fortune, Since I was convinced, that happinefs did not conSist in luxury or Splendor ; that if it was not Seated in the mind, it was no where to be found. I faid, my wants were few, my dtSites fewer, and that ambition was a stranger to my breast.”—Here I was interrupted by the entran..e of a Servant, who told me, that there was a Gentleman deSired to Speak with me. “ I'hai’s the Lawyer (cried Mr. Smith -J now. Madam, fays he, beyourfelf; a6t with refclution and propriety ; by which means you will triumph over your enemies, and at the fame tinv^, (added he, striking his bofom,} give peace and pleasure to this heart of mine.” I made no reply, but hastened into the next room, where I found a pale-faced, Simpering man, whofe want of education appeared through all his bows, and affedfation of extreme politenefs : He instantly nrefented me with a letter from yix. Williams^ which was couched in the tenderest terms, de-. daring the violence he did himfelf, in prh-D %	poSmg
\
172 The MEMOIRS OF postng an expedient to me, which fliocked his affection even to name : He then narrates all the circumstances, which I had already been informed of by Mr. Smith, and then proceeds to stiew me, the necessity there is for my joining in the deceit—Me tells me, nay. Swears, that he will return me the articles the moment his ^ father has Seen them ; and then he purpofes Setting out immediately for Calais, where he hopes I will follow him as quick as potSible, there to meet, that w^e may part no more. He appeals to my knowledge of his passion for me, as a proof of the impolSibility there would be of his living without me ; and ends with accusing him- > Self of doing injustice to my fentiments, in using perfuasion, when he ought to be convinced, that I would not hesitate one moment to give i him liberty, when, by fo doing, I Should recall : him to my arms, with a heart overflowing with love, and gratitude.”	5
I'his letter (as you may fee) was calculated ^ to Seduce me ; 1 Saw it was, and therefore it j failed of its intended effetst. I fat down, after i having perufed it, and drew Some paper near ; me, w'hich lay upon the table, (we being in 5 Mr. IVilliamd^ study,) and taking up a pen, I | was going to write an anfwer, when the l^awyer faid, “ Madam, I beg your pardon, but had . you not better sign ihefe papers before you write, ^ as J. am really much pressed for time, and have , a perlon to fee in this neighbourhood before I , leave it; and, therefore, I can call for your let- , ter, on my return from thence, and in the mean time, I will (if you pleafe) difpatch my Clerk to ^ town with thefe writings immediately ; only do , you Sign them. Madam, (here he laid them be- [
fore I
Mrs. williams. 173	i
fore me, and put a pen into my hand,) for continued he, poor Mr. Williams is very impatient	|
to be at liberty, in order to fee you. Madam ;	I
he laments his abfence from you, Madam, upon	I
my Soul, as if you was his mistrefs.” I cast a	'
look of foverei2:n contempt on the fellow, and	|
anlwered, “ The affair Mr.	here pro-	|i
poles to me, is of too much importance to be	'
decided in a moment ; I ffiall, therefore, con-fult with my, relations upon it, and then give	lil
my final anSwer.” Here the man almost stun-	*1
ned me with his volubility, in order to prove the	jj
abfolute necestity there was of the papers being Signed diredlly ; he expatiated much on the	,j
pain my refufal of complying with my hufband’s	i:
request would be to him.—I interrupted him, by	||
Saying, coldly, “ Sir, "Wx. Williams has an ad-	jj
vocate in my breast, which pleads his caufe, with more eloquence than you could do, tho’ you had the tongue of z Cicero \ but my honor	|
IS concerned in this cafe, and confcquently his	!
alfo; therefore I Shall beadviied by my friends, before I aQ in an affair of Such high importance as this is, both to himfelt and me.” “ Is this your determination, Mariam V* (laid the Lawyer, with an air of difcontent.) I anfwered,
“ Yes, Sir, it is!”—“ If that is the cafe, (he	I
replied, turning Short upon his heel,) I have nothing more to do here.” I begged he would call again for my letter, (as he had himfelf pro-pofeddoing;) but he Shuffled, and laid, “ It was fit Mr. Williams Ihould know rny anSwer diredly ; adding, that I might lend a Servant with the letter to town fo faying, he took his leave, and I returned to l\\x.Hmitb and my Sister. The former, on Seeing me, laid, “ Well,
^	D 3	Madam,
5 74 The MEMOIRS or Madam, by my net being called upon, and your j ihort stay with the Lawyer, I venture to pre-	I
fume, that you have followed my counfel.” I	'
anfwered, “ that I had ; and then narrated to him all the converfation which pasted between me and the Lawyer; adding, but ls/\r.Smithy my heart heaves with Sorrow, when I think how 1 have vexed and disappointed poor Pvlr. tVil-liams^ by my non-compliance witli his request; indeed, Said 1, my woithy Mentor, 1 do not think I Shall ever muster up fortitude enough to reSist his anger, much, lets to luffer him to be dragged to prifon : No, no. Sir, (continued I,)
I have gone to the utmost extent of my courage ; one word of complaint from him, will inevitably undo me; for, dear as he is to me, I had rather lole him for eve*', than forfeit his esteem for one moment. I then entreated Mr. S?nith to go to my hulband, and try, if postlble, to Soften my dilobedience to his commands, by expoSmg the reafons which induced to it. I begged him to inform me, what had been the conlequence of my refustng to stgn the articles ? and, in order to engage him the more readily to comply with this my request, I promiled him, upon my word of honor, not to act, dirtdlly, or indire6Uy, in the affair, till I Should lee him again. This convention being agreed upon on his part, the good man ordered his chariot cli-redtly, and Soon after let off ior London, promii-ing to return as Soon as possible.
I now thought it would be proper to anSwer j my hulband’s letter, which I began, by telling him, ‘‘ That I could fee no ufe in h\h pretending to part with me ; for, unlefshe did fo in reality, it would be an eternal Source of contention between
Mrs. WILLIAMS. 175
tween him, and his father : I told him, that his inSincerity had been the caufe of moft, (if not all,) the quarrels he had had with his parents ;
I faid, it was the faying of a great Philofopher,
* That deceit might fometirnes be convenient, but could never be a necessity, ssnce its becoming fo, would make Providence the Author of it.’ I astured him, that 1 could live with him in a goal, without a murmur, or that I would beg, or starve with him ; but that I could never bring my hand to reSign him, whilst my heart told me, that I could not furvive his lofs, I	I
then hinted, that he had been the caufe of h\$	I
parents daring to make fuch odious propoSitions, by fuffering me to be traduced tn their opinions, whilst he knew how far I was from meriting the humiliating fcene he had now brought upon me ;
I represented to him, how eafy it would be for me to exculpate myfelf of all the crimes laid to my charge, and begged of him not to force me to do it, by inSisting on my compliance with his request ; I added, that if I was to be abandoned, 1 would, at least, have the fatisfadlion of proving my innocence ; and, by that means, I fhouid, perhaps, draw pity even from thofe, who now machinated my ruin : I ended, with assurances, in all other refpetls, of my obedience to his	I
commands.”	?
Before 1 had difpatchtd the fervant with this	I
letter, I received another from my hulbaod ; which, as it was written in a stile of reproach, threats, and ill humour, I did not think proper to anfwer, efpecially as M.x. Smith w^as not with me : I therefore bid the fervant go immediately to town with my letter, without taking any notice of that which I had that momept received.
D 4	Ail	[
176 - The MEMOIRS o?
All that day, and the greatest part of the next n I heard nothing from London*, during which time, my Spirits were in a continual agitation, my imagination formed a thoufand monssers, which my reafon was insufficient to combat with.
I really think, thatfuSpenfe is the painfullest Sen-fation of the human breast ; at least, I have .always found it fo. I tried to read, but could not, ray doubts and fears distra6Icd me, and at that moment I would have preferred the certainty of the greatest misfortune which could have befallen me, in preference to that state of incertitude my mind then laboured under. On the evening of the Second day, a Space of time which to me had appeared an eternity, Mr. Smith arrived, and, with a Smiling countenance, faid to me. “ My good child, I give you joy; your huffiand is at liberty ! We have had a fad piece of work of it (continued he) to bring the old man to any reafonable terms, but, however at last, on condition that his Son would give him a bond for the money, he agreed to pay all the debts which stiould appear against him'. Thefe have, upon being called in, proved pretty considerable, I alSure you. Upon looking over thefe papers, I took occasion to remark to the ^ old Gentleman, that, amongst all his fen’s debts there wasnoi tobe found onearticle of your contracting. 'Isi which he anfwered abruptly. No, I fee there is not; but if his wife fpends all her hulband’s ready money, how Should he sind any to defray his necessary expences, or to pay his trades people ? To this I made no reply, Madam, as I had your orders not to justify you to him.”—Here I interrupted the good old man, by alking him, in a faultering voice. When
I stiould
Mrs. W I L L 1 A M S.	i77
I (hould See Mr. Williams ? “ Not today, Madam, he replied, nor perhaps to-mcrrow, for he has a good deal of buSmefs upon his hands at prefent ; he must first execute the bond I mentioned to you, and then Satisfy his creditors ; he	i
is now only at liberty upon his father’s having bailed him, together with myfelf.” Mr. Smith went on : “ I found your hulband (fays he) violently piqued at the report the Lawyer had made, of your anfwer to the propofal he Sent you ; on feeing me, be began to complain of your ingratitude in the bitterest terms, and then inveighed, with great eloquence, against the V perfidy of all your fex. When he had pretty well vented his fpleen, I begged to be heard in my turn ; he was Silent, when I reprefented to him, that you had a61ed entirely by my advice ; at which he feemed Surprized. I then eridea-voured to stiew him, how ungenerousty he had treated you, and how unlike a Gentleman, and a Man of Honor it was, to take advantage of your love and tendernefs for him, in order to make you iubfcribe to your own undoing ; he looked rather out of countenance, I thought, when I was going on, but a Servant entered with your letter : He read it with Some emotion, and then Said, I have been prodigioufly deceived	I
in my wife’s charadier, Mr. Smith ; I always thought fhe had more tendernefs than fortitude in her difpofition ; but I now find, that, when roufed, fhe can be both steady and refolute.
Here he paufed for a moment, and then Said,.
Weil, I don’t absolutely blame her for following your advice; and I must look out for Some other means of extricating myfelf, that’s all.
1 told him, that I was going to his father ; he D 5	faid.
178 The MEMOIRS OF
faid, if So, the Lawyer fhould meet me there with your letter. He begged I would plead for him. I anfwered, that 1 v. ouid for you, which was pretty much the fame thing, with this difference only, that your fufferings, on his con-finemenr, were infinitely greater than his. He Smiled, we parted, and I went to the old Gentleman ; you know thefcst, Madam, only this, that your hufband Sent me a card, requesting riae to inform you, that he would fee you as Soon as it was in his power, tho’he could not six the time, as it depended a good deal on his father, who was Seldom in a hurry to pay his money-”
I eafily discovered, from Mr. SmitFs account of my hufhand’s behaviour, that he was inte-	i
rioily angry with me, but that he had fopprested	|
his refentment, in consideration of that Gentle- ' man’s having declared himfelf to have been the direSlor of my condu£l in the whole affair ; perhaps, too, the menaces contained in my letter, might, in feme meafure, have tied his tongue, hr at that jiintluje, had I undeceived his father, it is probable he would not have astifted him, and in that cafe, he would have found himleU in a dreadful dilemma. I communicated my thoughts to my friend ; he agreed with me in my opinion, and added, “ Your hufband’s charafter is, my dear child, as the French fay, fo inconfequent, that there is nothing to be dreaded from his rdentment, nor indeed any thing to be relied upon, thro’ the whole tenor of his con-tiu6l ; he is determined to adsion, by the im-pulfe of the prefent moment; nor has he, that i can obferve, one fixed principle ; he has, indeed, adopted fome ablurd prejudices, to which he obstinately adheres, becaule they flatter his
palSions;
Mrs. williams. 179
passions; but, unfortunately, brobity is a virtue he is unacquainted with. Excufe me, dear Madam, (continued Mr. Smith,) if I Speak thus freely on io tender a fubjeft, as this I know is to you, but I would prepare you for a stroke, which I forefee will fallen you : Mr. Williamses chara6lerand your’s are totally different. Said the good man ; vice may, and must, admire virtue, but never can either love or associate long with it ; virtue is a glafs, in which it Sees its ou n deformity, and thcrelore will ever avoid it as much as possible. Mr. Williams don’t want fenfe, (continued Mr Smith,) and tho’ you	j
never Seem to fee his faults, be affured, that he	j
is not the dupe ; he knows they cannot be un-obferved by you, and your generous forgivenefs of them, in Spite of his vanity, lessen^ him in his own eyes ; thus, from a strange perverfity in his nature, thole virtues in you, which ought	1
to endear you to him, have diametrically a con-	.
trary effeCr; and, as Dean Swift fays,
“ Your altitude offends the eyes	!
Of thoSe who want the power to rife. ’	!
In Short, (continued Mr. Smith,) in enntradic * | tion to all general rules, a conduct which would,	f
in all human probability, have reformed any	j
other rhan, has contributed only to confirm him	!
in his errors, and to make him purfue, with more	;
avidity, what he calls pleafure, and which, in	j
my opinion, would be better named debauche-	I
ry : Go on, however. Madam, (Said my good friend,) continue to make truth and virtue your guides, and let fortune do her worst ; fhe can rob us of every thing but the Self- approved hour, and that alone will be Sufficient to raife us above her frowns, and is, in truth, of infinitely mpre
value,	1
1	* j
i8o The M E M O I R S of
value, than all the favours which she has in her power to bestow. You have virtue, and a friend. Madam, (continued the good man, Smiling ;) go, confult the Philofophers you are fo fond of, and fee if their most Sanguine wishes ever afpired to the postestion of more.’^ I looked at Mr. Smithy ^whe.n he had ceafed to fpeak, with admiration ; my heart avowed the truths he had uttered ; I thanked him sincerely for his kind admonition, and then endeavoured to make him think lefs in-juriousty of my hushand, but I found him inflexible on that head. The rest of the evening was Spent in moralizing on the evils of site, when we both agreed with La Bruyere, * “ la plujpart lies bommes employent la premiere par-tie de leur vie d rendre rautre miferabled’’
The next morning Mr. Smith returned to London, after having enjoined me to call upon him in any difficulty that might occur, either in my owner hushand"saffairs; for. Said he, “ My dear child, I beg you would rest assured, that both my counSel and fortune are at your command ; fo 1 beg you would afk for the former, anddifpoSe of the latter, whenever you may have occasion for either of them.” I thanked him with tlie most lively Senfe of his generosity, and friendship, and then bid him adieu.
A few days after Mr. SmiiKs departure, Mf. Williams came home ; he met me with an air of great good breeding, and faid the civilcst things, upon his having occasioned me So much uneasineSs; but, alas! his lace Spoke truth, and I could read there, that his heart difavowed the
* Which may be thus tranflated, viz.That the greateft part of mankind make it the bufmefs of their youth to lay up mifery for their age.
language
M RS. W I L L I A M S.	iSi
language ot his rongue. He aftced me, when I had Seen that old meddlingiool. Smiths I Said,
I thought myfelt infinitely obliged to that Gentleman, and that I had leen him a few days ago.
“ Not perhaps So mudi as you fuppofe. Madam, he replied ; for, however Spacious his ar-	f
guments may have appeared to you, he was	>
most certainly not your friend, in counfelling you	ij
to refufe the propoSition I made you; for, had he not interfered in what did not concern him,	I
I should not have been forced to give a bond to my father for the money he lent me, and which now, if I should die, he will undubitably come upon my effeds for, and by that means strip you	j
to your shift; No, no, continued he, believe	^
me, my Dear, when 1 asture you, that, under	'
the pretence of being your friend, he was the	;j
agent your enemy.”
I could not bear to hear my proledor’s cha-rader thus cruelly aSperfed, which made me an-	1
fwer Mr. Williams with tome warmth, “ That	1
how far Mr. SmitFs judgment might have err-	Ij
ed in the affair, I should not pretend to decide,	-
but that 1 was perfedly convinced, that the ad-	1
vice he gave me was Sincere, and fuch as he would have given to his own child, in the fame Situation ; for indeed, my Dear, continued I, I look upon Mr. Smith to be a truly honest man, endued with a good understanding, and the most benevolent heart ; poffeffed of thefe virtues, I think he is an honor to humanity.” “ He is as romantic in his notions as yourfelf, (interrupted Mr. Williams^) and therefore I don’t wonder that	|
you are fo fond of him.” Here the difeourfe dropped, as I did not care to enter into a dif-quiiition of what thofe notions were, which he called romantic.	The
i82 The MEMOIRS of
The next day my hufband Said to me, with a Sprightly air, Well, Charlotte, are you ready to go to France P for I am tired of this Stupid country \” I anfwered, with truth, “ That I was ready to'accompany him wherever he pleafed, at the fame time repeating my assurances, that I Should be happy in whatever place he carried me to. So long as I enjoyed his friend-stip and Society.” He bowed. Saying, I was infinitely obliging; he then told me, That he would, if I choSe it, take a lodging in town for a fortnight, that I might have an opportunity of taking leave of my friends, and of packing up my things at my leifure ; for, (fays he, with a half Smile, I don’t think you will fee England Soon again, Charlotte.'^ I replied, “ That I was entirely at his difpoSal, and ihould always be content. So I was but with him, and Saw him happy.” Soon after this w e went to town. My father and mother were not to be in London that winter; So, not being able to See them, 1 wrote to bid them adieu; They an-Swered me, wifhing us our health, and a good journey, and defiring that I would leave Sophie at my uncle Boldby’s', which, in obedience lo their commands, I did. A day or two before we left England, my Sister begged I would Suffer her to go to her uncle’s. Saying, “ That the continual preparations, which the Saw before her eyes for my departure, were too much for her Spirits.” In compliance with her request, I carried her to Mr. Boldby^s, where Ihe then insisted upon taking leave of me j our parting was accompanied by floods of tears on both sides. In her I lost an affedlionate sister, and a tender friend ; nay, indeed, the paincipal ccnfolation of
my
Mr s. W I L IH a M S. 183
wy life. On her part, as lire had been preSent at many Scenes which had alarmed her tender-nefs for me, She now c’learied my being Separated from all my friends, and left totally in the power of a man, whom She had conceived a very bad opinion of; She therefore, in a transport of grief, recommended me to the care of the Almighty, and then flinging her arms round my neck, almost drowned me with her tears: I pressed her to my boSom with unutterable fond-neSs. My uncle and aunt were preSent at this affecting Scene, and botli of them Seemed moved at our reciprocal tendernefs and love of each other; nay, even my aunt’s eyes watered. She took leave of me, with a foftnefs in her manner towards me, which I had never perceived her to have Since my marriage. My uncle took me in his arms, Siying, ‘‘ Adieu, my dear girl ! If you fhould want a friend, whilst abroad, remember me, and be Sure let us hear often from you.” I could not anfwer him, So hastened out of the room, almost fuflocated with too much SenSi-bility.
I ordered the chariot to drive to Mr. SmitKs-I found him at home. On my entrance, he perceived that my heart was full, and my eyes red : I told him from whence I came ; this worthy man faid every thing that friendihip and good fenfe could dilate, both for my instruflion and confolation ; after which, he told me, that he had now two favours toafkof me, and which he begged I would not refufe him. I anfwered him, whilst pleafure Sparkled in my eyes, “ Ah, Sir, can I be So happy as to have it in my power to oblige yon ?” “ Yes, Madam, (he replied,) and estentially too ; but first you must give me
your
i§4	Th E M E M O I R S o F
your honor, to grant my requests, before I tell you what they are:” ‘‘ ThcSe conditions woul-d be hard. Sir, I replied, from any body but your-felf, whole charaSer is So well known to me, that I am Sure you would not engage me to do any thing which I ought to refufe , I therefore do most readily promife to obey your commands, be they what they will,” “ Why thenV Madam, (Said Mr, Smithy) the first is, that, on no pretext whatfoever, you go into the interior of a convent during the life of your hufband ; be-caufeif you do, I am well Convinced that you will never come out again: The Second is that you will make me your banker. You are going, my Dear, (Said this worthy man,) into a country, where you have neither friends nor connexions of any fort, with a hustiand who wall inevitably run into debt, in every town he goes through ; you may, and probably will, find yourfelf Sometimes without either money or credit, (I don’t mean, however to Support Mr. fViIlia?ufs extravagancies,) but I cannot bear the thought, that you, my dear, good young Lady, Should | be brought into any distreSs : I am an old man. Madam, who has neither child nor relation, but you, who are So worthily the child of my adoption ; therefoiv. Madam, you will only make ufe of what is already your own, by drawing upon me.” Here I interrupted this wonderful man, being unable to bear any longer the violence ol thofcTenfations which his difcourfe had ) raifed in me ; 1 stung myfelf on my knees be-fide him ; in a rapture of gratitude, I kissed his hand, called him father, and, in stiort, stammered out a fett of incoherent words, which expressed my fenfibility of his truly parental care of me, more pathetically, perhaps, than the
most
Mrs. W 1 L L I A M S. 185
most studied piece of eloquence could have done. The good man raiSed me from the ground, dropped a tear, and then begged leave to hand me to my chariot, faying, “ Your feelings. Madam, are too fine for Scenes like thoSe which have just pasted between us, and I own, that the being obliged to part with you, is almost too much for my age ; but, I flatter myfelf, (continued he,) that I Shall frequently hear from you.” I prested his hand, as an alSurance that heihould, and in Silent forrov/ bid him adieu with my eyes; words were not made to expreis fenSaiions like thoSe I then felt.
On niy return home, I found my hufband in high Spirits and good humour; change of Scene, and variety in all its modes, was one of his darling pastions; he perceived that I had been crying when he raillied me agreeably upon my weak-neSs, as he called it. I did not attempt to justify myfelf, but promised that I would grow chear-ful again as fast as I could. A Servant now came to acquaint him, that his Taylor was below ; he turned to me, and Said, “ Will, you give him leave, my Dear, to try my deaths on here I bowed assent, and up came the man, followed by another, both loaded with bundles ; they tried him on four Suits of deaths, all of them either embroidered, or richly laced, befides a frock and laced waistcoat. He then aSked me, “ How I liked his taste ?” I anfwered, “ That 1 thought them both rich and elegant.” When the man was gone, I Said to him, “ I am Surprized, my Dear, that you stiould make up So many cloaths in England, when you are going into a country where you may buy them much cheaper, and ' have them made in vho. French iastion ; befides,
I appre-
i86 T H E M E M O I R S o F
I apprehend, that you will not be able to wear thofe which are made here, with any propriety, in France.’’'* “ O, I beg your pardon for that, (fays he,) I (hall wear them there, I af-fure you ; beSides, I am now following your favourite plan oeconomy, (continued he,) as I don’t intend paying for thefe cloaths, (at least till my father is dead,) and therefore, you know, it is fomuch gained ; and, apropos, I would ad-viSe you, my dear, added he, to follow my example, by taking up what you want, before we go; we run no rifqiieof being stopped, as I have published, that I don’t intend going this month yet, tho’ I purpofe Setting off on Sfuejday about midnight; So, before any body can mif-trust our flight, we Shall be on the other Side of the water.”
I was fo astonished at this harangue, that it had deprived me almost of the power of Speech, nor do I believe I Should have articulated, of Sometime at least, if Mr. Williams had not rouf-ed me, by faying, in a pretty loud tone of voice, “ Well, my Dear, what do you think of my plan ?”	“ It is So new to me. Sir, and So fo-
reign from my ideas of the rules of redlitude, (I replied,) that I really am afraid to give my opinion of it ; but you, my Dear, are the matter of your own adlions, and therefore the pio-per judge of them; for my part, (I continued,) your Scheme being intirely incompatible with my Senfe of honor and probity, 1 must beg leave, in this instance, not to take you for a precedent.” At this he looked out of humour, and Said, “ That my stoical virtue, I fhould find, would neither feed nor cloath me.” I replied, “ Perhaps not; but then it would teach me to bear,
with
Mrs. W I L L I A M S. 187
with fortitude and resignation, the want of both and So faying, I went out of the room, in order to put an end to the conversation.
On the Tuefday following, at midnight, we fat out for Dcwr in two different post-chaifes, for the convcniency of carrying our baggage, as Mr Williams told me, upon my obferving that one would have been Sufficient for us both. We took no Englifh Servants with us, as we had been affured by many people, who had travelled with them, that they u ere of no ufe in a foreign country, but, on the contrary, generally extremely troublefome; this T found fo just an observation, that in the courfe of many years re-fdence abroad, I never Saw an exception to it. We found, on our arrival at Dover^ a vessel ready to fail, and in four hours from our going on board of her, were fafely landed at Calais, from which place we fat out almost immediately on our road to Paris. The journey, the change of air, and the novelty of every thing I Saw, all togethei contributed to give me Spirits, of which I had naturally a great stiare, but they had fora long time been weighed down by the iron hand of misfortune.
I don’t know whether there is not Something in the air of your country, my dear Adelaide, which infpires one v./ith gaiety ; but certain it is, that I was never chearfuller, nor in better health, than at the period I am now' writing of. My hufband, who was well acquainte;i with the country, appeared to be delighted at feeing it again ; he was all attention and good-humour on the road. He (hewed me Cbantilliy and whatever elfe was w'orthy observation on our way ; and when we arrived at Paris, Said he
would
i88 The M EM O I R S of
would just let me fee every thing that was curious in that famous city, and then proceed to the South of France, where he purpofed fettling. I had no will of my own, and knowing no part of the country I was going to, all places w’ere equal to me. I fliall not tire you, my ^dear girl, with a defcription of a town in which you was born, and bred, nor tell you the raptures I was in at the Paintings, &c. which I law at the Palais Royal, dec. You know, I feel the Arts, tho’ I am mistrefs of none of them: We have lived together zt Paris, and you cannot have forgot my enthuSiafm for painting and Sculpture ; your plays, too, delighted me, and I was both astonifhed and charmed, at the amazing fuperiority of your A6frestes to ours. I had letters of recommendation to Lady S. thro* whofe means, I was introduced into good company; I therefore faw Verfailles, &rc. with propriety and eafe, and fpent my time very agreeably.
Mr. Williams was, apparently, the happiest man I ever faw; pleaSure fo intirely occupied his every moment, that he had not time to think. We feldom met, but in the evening, at our hotel ; when, after I had related the adventures of the preceding day, he Several times had launched out into raptures, on the agreeable manner in which he had fpent his time, at a houfe he frequented, in the Eois de Boulogne, At last, I ventured to afk him the name of the family which he vifjted there. He fmiled, and Said, **	\ he Iyady’s name was Paris, who owned the
houle, but that the young Ladies who hoarded with her, were, he believed, no way related to lier ; (adding,) they are divine creatures! Such
figures!
Mrs. WILLIAMS. 189
figures ! Such talents! and Such vivacity ! In Short, my Dear, they are Angels,” I looked grave, and faid, “ Mr, Williams^ if the houfe you Seem fo enraptured with, be a bad one, you ought to have had delicacy enough to have Spared my fenSibility the knowledge of it.” He replied, “ Upon my foul, my Dear, I affure you, nothing passes there, the least tending to indecency; it is a hou(e, where most of the men of fasti ion flip, for a guinea a-piece, merely for the pleafure of converSing with the girls, and hearing them play upon Some instrument, and that’s all, upon my honor.” I faid, 1 hoped he Spoke the truth, but obferved, at the fame time, “ That it appeared tome rather incredible, that virtuous girls stiould board at a houfe of public • reception, where they were expofed to the con-verlation of every man, who thought it worth his while to pay a guinea for the pleafure of their company.” But as I had a mind to finisti the difeourfe, I ended it, by faying, “ That I was totally a stranger to the manner of the country I was now in, and that therefore, perhaps, what would be regarded as a great impropriety in landy might not be any here.” To which ob-fevvation Mr. Williams whistled out, “ Aye, to be Sure ;” then complained he was steepy, and fo went to bed.
VVe had now stayed fix weeks at PariSf when my hufband propofed our Setting out for Lyons, which accordingly we did, in a few days, in a beilin and fix, in which were Mr. Williams, myfelf, and my maid. Our journey was agreeable, the roads good, and the weather remarkably sine. When we arrived at Lyons, Mr. Williams appeared mightily pleafed with the
place,
igo	The MEMOIRS of
place, and, on a few days acquaintance with Some of its inhabitants, declared hinaSelf determined to fix in it—He changed his mind, however, not long after.-1 had procured letters
from Several of my acquaintance at PariSy to theirs at Lyonsy So that I very Soon entered into an agreeable female Society, amongst which were an old Lady, whoSe name I have forgot, and her niece, MademoiSelle De la G. a very fenfi-ble, clever girl; and who, as her aunt was im-menSely rich, and had no near relation but her, was Suppofed to be a very great fortune.
This aunt of her’s was in an ill state of health, i and very infirm ; she had been advifed by the ’ Phyficians to iry what her native air would do for her, for which reafon she had left PariSy and came to Spend Some time at Lyonsy where -she was born. I was informed, whilst I was at PariSy that the Marquis De P. had made his addresses to the young Lady, but without fuc-cefs, as the old one, not approving his charaQier had declared, “ That if her niece married him ' she would not give her a farthing, neith.r in her life-time, nor at lier deceafe.” At that time I Itad never leeft the Marquis, but had frequently heard hii^ %oken of, as being a very handfoine, lively, agreeable libertine ; he was of distinguished birth, to wlstch his fortune was no way anfwerable, being but very Small.
‘.Dneday, when I was at dinner with Made-moifelle D^ la G. and her aunt, ar their houfe, I could not help remarking the Servant who stood behind the young Lady’s chair, who was Seated dire£Uy oppoSite to me ; he was a fine figure, and had an air of eafe and gentility which I thought did not correspond -with his livery ; I
even
Mrs. williams,	191
even imagined, that I perceived him look at his mistrefs with an air of intelligence and familiarity, very inconSistent with the charafter he was in. The old Lady, tho’ not very clear Sighted took notice of the attentive manner in which I had Surveyed this footman, and, when the cloth was removed, Ihe Said to me, “ Don’t you think, M.TS. Williams, that the fellow you Seemed to obServe So much, is a very unfit Servant for a young Lady to have about her ? He has (continued She) an audacious, impudent look ; befides, he is good for notliing, and dues no one thing, that I know of, but study his glaSs, and adorn his pretty perSon ; I cannot imagine what my niece keeps him for, unleSs it be to look at.” Here the old Lady ceaSed ; and I anSwered, “ That I thought he was by much the genteel-est Servant I had ever Seen ; (adding,) that if he had not worn a livery, I Should have taken him for a man of faShion.” MademoiSelle DelaG. Said, “ She did not think the fellow either So bad as her aunt had represented him, nor could She agree with me, in thinking him So verygen-teel a figure ; that he was well enough ; and tho’ the had no Sort of atwchment to him, yet fne could not bring herSelt'st) turn him away, till stie found him in a fault.” Here the conversation dropped, and I thought no more of it. till one day Mr. Williams told me, whilst we were at dinner, “ That that morning there had been a great riot at the tennis-court, about MademoiSelle De la G.’s footman, who, (Says Mr. Williams,) it feems, plays remarkably well at tennis. He was this morning amufing himSelf at that exerciSe, w hen Some Gentlemen came in to play a match, upon which one of them bid
him
I
192 The memoirs of
him leave the place, and aflced him, “ How he dare to be So impertinent, as to intrude himfelf into Gentlemens company ?” To which the fellow made an inSolent reply ; upon which the Gentleman ordered the master of the tennis-court to turn him out: This exafperated the man So much, that he gave the Gentleman a blow with the racket which he held in his hand.
Instantly, all the Gentlemen prefent refentcd the affront done to a member of their Society, and were going to cane the fellow ; when five i or Six stout Servants in livery rustled into the room, and refcued their comrade, as we then thought him; but it is Since whifpered, that they only did their duty, in defending their maf-ler; however this may be, it is certain, that the man went immediately to the Governor, who, in a short time after. Sent for the Gentlemen that fuppofed themfelves to have been infulted ; when, having clofeted them Separately, he dif-niisted them, and the affair is hushed up. Some body prefent at the Scuffle, took notice of the livery the fellows had on, who refcued Made-moifelle De la G.’s footman, and afked them, in my hearing, if their master, the Marqus De P. was at Lyo72s P To vshich question they returned no anfwer. Now I cannot help thinking, (continued Mr. iT/7//aOTj-,) but that it was the Marquis himfelf in difguife, who made all this bustle; for when he gave the Merchant the blow, he looked at him with Such an air of Superiority and contempt, as was obferved by all the company; and on being bid, in a peremptory tone, to leave the room, 1 Saw him clap his hand on his left Side, as if he meant to draw his Sword. It is certainly he, (Said my hushand,)
and
Mrs. W I L L I a M S.	193
and he has metamorphoSed hiinSelf thus, to be nearer his mlllreSs.” Mr. IVilUamf conjeflured fight, as appeared in about a month after this affair happened, when Madcmnifclle D’ la G’s aunt died, and immediately the Marquis aiSumeri iSis title and equipage, declaring himfjl' openly the lover of that young L-hIv, who was now in pof-feiSion of all her aunt’s fortune, which the gave, together with herfelf, in a ihort time, to tlie Marquis, who knew as well how to Spend the monev, as any man in Prance.
From the time of his flinging ofF his liverv, he was frequently at our houfe ; my hufband and he were extremely fond of one another’s company, from an analogy in their characters. One day, when I was raillying him upon. Iiis knight errantly in purfuit of his miftrefs, he Hid, fmiling, “ You don’t know half my adventures. I don’t love (fa)s he) to boast of the favours received from the Fair, hut, however, I will relate one to yon, which my wife knows to be true : Her aunt’s cookmaid was extremely ugly, and far from young; stie, however, fell in love with me, and, in order to give me tlTential proofs of her affc6tion, ufed to cram my pockets with cold meat, and w'hatever die Ihe could steal from the pantry : Which favours, (faid he,) I durst not refuiie, for fear Ihe should either take it ill, or furpedl my difguife ; tor, as I w.as at board-wages, she thought she did me a great kind-nefs, by thus cheating her miftrefs. One day the laid tome, taking me tenderly by the hand,** l.ouiff. I have a great friendship for you : lam worth money, Louii, and if you can like me, 1 will marry you, tho’ you have not a groat.’* I thanked her a thoufand times for the honor she intended me, but at the fame time lamented^, that I had made a vow \.o	Ant bony y never to msiry. Whenl lay
VoL. II.	£	'	Si!
194	T H E M E M O I R S o F
jilof a violent fever, and my life was defpaired of,
Ihe shook her head, and Said, “ It was a rash vow, and a great pity, that I should have made it.” ‘Finding iierfelf thus difappoited in her hopes of marrying me, she turned her thoughts another way ; for which purpofe, one night, when I was almost asteep, she crept foftly to my bedSide ; I perceived, by the light she held in her hand, that it was she, and I honestly own, I was frighted at the Sight of her. I leaveyou tojudge, JVilUnnn (Said the Marquis, addresting himfelf to my husband,) hoW execrably ugly she must have been, to have found me cruel, at Such an hour, and in fuch f circumstances; I was So, however, by assuring i her, with as much Seeming concern as Icouldpof- j ssbly sting into my countenance, that I was very ^ feniible of the favour she inteniled ;0e, but that I , was too generous to deceive her, and therefore thought I ought in honor, to acquaint her, that I was at prefent in So bad a state of health, as to force me to decline the happinefs which she fo obligingly offered me. This cold compliment had its effect, for she left me, without anfwering one word ; however, I cauld eassly perceive, that she never forgave me , and, if the old J^ady had lived much longer, I make no doubt, (continued the Marquis,) that she would have contrived to have had me turned rut of the houfe ; but fortunately things turned out better than Iexpedted, and our aunt good naturedly went off in time.”
The Marchionefs told us, “ That she had done all in her power to prevent the Marquis following her to Lyonsy in a difguife fo unworthy of his rank; but all remonstrances were vain, (faid she,) he perfisted in being my footman, and, by that means, kept me in continual terrors, lest my aunt fliould discover the deceit, which she mast inevitably
Mrs. WILLIAMS.	195
tably have done, had her Senles been the least quicker than they were; but fortunately for us, file was very deaf, and almost blind, which prevented her from obfervingany of the monkey tricks he ufed to play me, fuch as pinching my fingers very often, when he gave me a plate, or a glals of wine, lo hard, that I have Several times been ready to stream out; and when any Gentleman dined with us, of my aunt’s acquaintance, if he thought they had any pretenfions upon me, he never failed playing them Some unlucky trick or other. In (hort, (Said the MarchioneSs,) I lived in a continual dread of his being found out; and on hearing of the Scuffle which happened at the tennis-court, I took it for granted, that the whole affair would be laid before the public, and that I Ihould lost both my fortune, and reputation, by his indiscretion.”
If I have tired you, my dear Adelaide^ with tlie length of this anecdote, it is becaufe I found it in my journal ; when recolle6Iing, that you was acquainted with the Marquis and MarchioneSs De P. I thought you might probably like to hear this part of their juvenile adventures; if not, you may pafs it over, and go on to my story.
Mr. Williams now began to grow tired of staying fo long in the lame place, and therefore determined to go to Aix ; accordingly I took leave of Lyons, and its inhabitants, three months after we had entered it, but not without regret, I affure you ; for I had formed a very agreeable Society in that town, fiom whom I had received the utmost kindnefs and civility : Nay, I had even contrasted a fort of friendfliip with one or two of them. So that I was really Sorry to leave the place. We left it, however, and arrived, without any accident, at Aix. On approaching it, I perceived, E 2	that
-! g6	r u E M -E 'M O d -R S -o^	|
that Mr. Williams Seemed to diflike its Situation-from which I concluded, that we Ihould not reside long in it. On our arrival, we were inform- j ed, that the town was full of Fnglifhy all of whom Sent us a comnliment the next day, and, amongst ^ the rest, ^\x Charles Stanly. J was not more Surprized, than vexed, at finding him (o near me,; for, from a vanity, inherent, I believe, in human nature, I was astiamed, and hurt, when I consi- | dered the striking contrast there was in the cha-	I
> rafters of Sir CbarleSy and Mr. IVilliams ; which	j
contrast could not, as 1 apprehended, pals unoh-ferved, either by Sir Charles himfelf, or any of the Englijlo, wd’.o were there at the time ; .the cori-Sequence of which would he, that I Should stand univerfally condemned, for the injudicious choice I had made of a hufband. 'i’his humiliating reflection mortified my vanity; and, for that reafon,
(with fhame I confefs lit,) gave me as much pain, as 1 had, perhaps, ever txperiencjed on much more important occasions; Such is the force of lelf-love.
Mr. Williams had, as you will easily imagine, from the time we entered Frauce, given into all the licentioufoefs of that gay country, continuing, liowever, to hehave with great poliienefs to me; and as he narrated none of his adventures to me, and that I fhut my eyes, we were upon very good terms, always in good humour with one another^ notwirhsianding which, the lofs of his all'tdion, which w ,s too evident to admit of a doubt, cauled a wound in my heart, which, I found, neither tim^, nor distipafion, could heal. I tried every means, which reaSon or imagination could Suggest, to regain his love, excepting repioaches, and ill humour; them, indeed, I never made ufeof, from an observation, that they generally defeated the purpofe for which they were intended. All my
endeavours!
f.Ds. WI.DLIA-MS:	197
rndeavours to recall his affeflions	totally
triiitleSs ; variety was his goddels; and iie Served her with a zeal, equal to that of an Indian Fakir for his idol. I’therefore Sighed in Secret, and was obliged to love him upon his own terms, Since I could not bring him to mine.
We were now vifiied by all the Englijh reSiding at Jix i Sir €harlef Stanlyj v/hh an air of confcious w'otth, told me, he was very glad to lee me in France \ Said'many obliging things on the improvement he perceived in my peilon. Since he left ibngland'.f and enquired much after every individual of my family. Mr. IVilliamt received him with great cordiality, and gave hiqn a general invitation to his houfe ; he frequenily came to See us, and one day, when he and I were alone, he Said, “ H it was not indiScreet, he begged I would tell him, who the perfon was, that L hinted at, in the fatal letter, in which I had informed him of’ my marriage with Mr. WilliaTns, whoSe love of him had been a motive, which induced me to re-luSe him my hand.” I pauled a moment, as I was not prepared for the question ; and then an-Iwered, candidly, ** Sir Charles, as Some years are past Since that event, and as the perlon in question was then a child, I think I may, without injuring her modesty, tell you, that it was my Sifter Sophie who had conceived a violent pastion foi you, and had, with tears and blusties, dilcovered it to me, without, however, intending to make me her confident.” He interrupted me, by aSk-ing, with Some emotion, “ It 1 thought She still retained the Same leniiments for him ?” I Said,
I could not postibly anSwer that questi.m, as I had always careSu ly avoided mentioning his name to her. Since he left England-, but riiat, 10 my knowledge, stie bad retuficl Itveral good offers, E 3	thougJv
19^	The MEMOIR S op
though prefSed very much by her friends to accept of one ot them; alledging, that She was determined to live Single; which refolution I had always attributed to her attachment for him,” Sir Charles thanked me for the confidence I had placed in him, and looking at me with eyes which Spoke both grief and tendernefs, he Said to me, “ You, Madam, was the only woman I ever loved, and your lofs, from its Seventy, I imagined, had steeled my heart for ever against any of your Sex ; I am, (however, faid he,) determined to continue to love you in the per Son of your Sister and friend, your beloved Sophie ; I will instantly go over to England, A offer her my hand. She is like you, (cominued he,) and Since I cannot be your hui-band, it wstb at least, be a great conSolation to me to be your brother.” I told him, “ That I Should look upon it as one of the happiest incidents of my life, if I had in any manner contributed to the certain happinefs of my Sister, by procuring her fo valuable a man as himfelf fora huSband.” Here we were obliged to put an end to our converfation, by company coming in to interrupt us.
1 need not tell you, I fuppofe, how rejoiced I was, on the profpefi of niy dear Sophie's being made happy, in the man She loved, and who was in every refpe6t fo worthy of her. It was not long before Sir Charles let out tor England ; I wrote by him, to all friends, and congratulated my Sister on her approaching felicity, with a warmth equal to the a(ie6tion I bore her. About thefame time, Mr. Williams and 1 quitted AiXy and went to Mar-feilles, where I hoped to fettle, at least for lome time, for I grew weary of the rambling liie which we had had for fo many months past, joined to my continual apprehenfions of my huSoand’s expences being too large for his pocket, which, when we
were
Mrs. W I L L I A M S.	199
were once fixed in a place, I flattered myfelf, might be brought into a n.arrower compafs. V/e had, by the means of a correspondent at Mar~ failles^ taken a good houfe there, and I was much pleafed, on my arrival, with the fingularity, as well as novelty of that town ; the staves, galleys, See. were all new to me, and at first fight made me fancy mylclf in the Levant. I found its inhabitants, like all thost of your nation, very polite and hofpitable to strangers. I was acquainted here with many very agreeable, well-iued, Senfible people, in whofe Society I could willingly have pasted my life. Mr. Williams appeared delighted with Marfeilles \ the multitude ol different amufe-ments it afforded, were a continual Source of entertainment to him : He was, indeed, feldomer at home than I could have wifhed him to be, bat then he was always chcarful and good-humoured when with me, nor did I know of any particular attachment he had at that time. Thus 1 continued, for five or fix months, to live, if not happy, at least tolerably content, and fo I might have probably continued for Some time longer, had it not been for an event, which, at the time it happened, robbed me of all my boasted fortitude, and, after having wojked me up almost to frenzy, funk me into the deepest defpair. An event, which a ieries of upwards of ten years has not been able to reconcile me to the remembrance of, without piercing my breast with the most ineffable grief ; as a proof of which, my nerves tremble, and my heart aches, whilst I am going to narrate it to you.. It was as follows;
Being going out one morning, I bad stopped at the street door of our heust tor Some moments, till my maid ran back for my fnust'-box, which I had forgot to put in my pocket. Site had no Sooner E 4	entered
200 T H E M E M O 1 R S o F
entered the houfe, than an ill-looking, Shabby boy alked me, “ It Mr. Williams was at home I anSuered, “ No and then alked him what he wanted with that Gentleman? He Said, “ He had a letter lor him, which he was charged to deliver into no hands but his own.” I found myfelf instantly Seized w ith a Spirit of curioSity, winch w’as very uncommon in me on Such an occafion, and which I can, therefore, no way account lor, un-leSs I was excited to It from the figure of the boy, and the oddity of the letter, which was folded in the aukwardest manner, and direfled in a hand that was hardly legible. Whatever might be my motive, it is certain, that I was determined both to know its contents, anti from whom it came : I therefore took it out of the boy’s hand, faying, “ Child, you may depend upon it, that I will take care of the letter, and give it into my master’s own hand, when he comes home at which the boy looked rather Surprixed, but feeing that I was in polTestion of it, he only made me a bow, and went away. The letter, I found, w as Sealed with a wafer, which was not quite dry, I therefore opened itwitheaSe, when, returning into the houfe, 1 hastened to read it. Its contents w-ere to this purpofe, viz “ That the ptriun from whom it came, assured Mr. Williams, that had (he followed her ow'n inclinations, fhe would have ssown on the wings of love to his arms, on the fiiss fummons stie had received from him ; but that, notwithstanding fhe had stewn mother Paris all his letters in which he had made her Such great ofTeis, yet ssie could neither by fier tears, nor intreaties, prevail on the old woman to cenfent to part with her, and that without her pei mission fhe durss not attempt to leave her, as She knew well enough, from feveial inssancesof the kind which had happened,
that
Mrs. WI L L I A M S.	aot
that She would h.ive found out a means of making her repent it, either Sooner or later; but, at Ust, it pleaSed God, (fhe fys,) to releafe her, by converting the heart of Mrs. Par/5, v. ho was turned fantenijl, and had left off trade. She, therelore, finding lierfelf free, went immediately to his Banker, with the draught he had lent her, which was instantly paid, and Slie Set out direSlly for Marfeilles, where fhe w'as that moment arrived, at Such an inn, in fuch a street, and there waited, v/ith the utmost impatience, for the joy of clafp-ing him with rapture to her bofom to which Ihe added feme exprestions, that were rather more tender than decent, and ends with Signing herlelf, “ his ever affe6fionaie, Fatimef’
I beg you, JdAaide, to judge of the Situation I was in,-alter having perufed this letter: The knowledge that he was going to keep a rrustiefs in form, that it wa&aprerw.stitated thing, and that tiiat mif-treSs was a pupil of mother Farids, were circumstances of the most alarming nature. I forefaw,, that the-confequence of this connexion would infallibly be the ruin both of liimSelf and me ; I was fenfible of the expenSivenefs of the acquiSuion he had made,and knew very well what must be the end of it; at the fame time that it w-asout of my power to bring any lemcdy to the.evils which threatened me ; for I was but loo well convinced, that stiould I-have attempted-lo have complained to Mr. tVit-liams of his ill treatment of me, or ventured to remonstrate,. though in the gentlest terms, on the indelicacy of his conduSf, he wt>uid wuh plcalure have Seized that opportunity of throwing oif all difguife, and most probably would have Ltt me to. confole myfelf under my afflictions as I thought proper. In this dicadful ddemma, I remained E 5	Some
202 The M E M O I R S o e
Some time abSorbe'd in thought; when, recoI!e£N ing that I might be Surprized by my hulbancl in that Situation, I roufed myfelf, and re-fealcd the letter, then put it into my pocket, determining not to let him know I had read it, at least at that time. As Soon as he came Itome, 1 prefented it to him, faying, ** That a little dhty boy had brought ' it:” On his breaking the wafer, I Saw him look confuSed, though I don’t believe he knew the hand at first, or he would have turned his back, and not have opened it before me : As he perceived who it was from, he stepped, by stow degrees, from me, till he arrived at the window, where, having recovered himfelf a little from the furprize the having received (uch a note from my hand had given him, he faid tome, “ This letter, my Dear, is about bufinefsof confcquence ; 1 must, therelore, go to the perfons with whom it is to be tranfatled, and Sh.ill probably not be able to re> urn to dinner So faying, he put on his hat, made me a low bow, and, with a fmile, went out.
I was now left alone to ruminate, at leifure, ©n the horrors of my fate. I had hitherto vainly hoped, that time, and an invariable adiierence to a condutf, which, with regaid to my hufband, I conceived ho he without a fault, would, in the end, have restored him to rcafon, and, by that means, have reconciled him-to virtue ; btjt now that he w a-s eonne6ted with a girl, whole every taste, probably, correfponded with his own, and whofe interest it would be to annihilate in his heart any the least fpark of affection, which might be tbOnd there, towards his wife ; nay, excited by her carestes or threats, I did not doubt but that he would be Soon brought to brave, what thoSe kind • of women call prejudice, by throwing offthemalk,. ahd publicly avowing their infamy : Efpecially as
wc
Mrs. W I L L I A M S.	203
we were (unfortunattiy for me) in a ceuniry, where Such an irregular condu-U. is only termed galjiantry, and is, indeed, generally looked upon ai being almost a necelSary ingredient in the formation of that inchanting creature called a Fine Gentleman. I tren'bled at the profpect which lay before me; I Saw the labyrinth I had got into, but could not,find the clue which could lead me out of it. “ Ah ! cried I, ini an agOtiy of grief, Vv^hereis now my good friend, Mr. Smithy to Support me under the weight of my afflictions S’ After having, for Some time, given way to my Sorrow, I found it necessary to SuppreSs it for the present, for which reaSon I ordered the Servants to Serve the dinner when ready, as their master would not dine at home : I therefore Sat down to it l>y myfelS; 1 even strove to eat, but that was out of my power. I passed the afternoon in a state difficult to be described. The evening came, but no Mr. Williams ; eleven, twelve, one o’clock struck, yet I heard no news of him ; at last I rung' the bell, and told my maid that I would go to bed, and So might all the Servants, as their master was gone into the country, and had Said, that if he did not . come home early, he Should not return till the next day. When the girl had undressed me, I bid her leave the room ; Saying, that I would put out ^ the candle mySelf. She accordingly retired, and I Sat up till three, still hoping that my hufband would reSpe£t me enough to Save appearances, and not expoSe himSelf to the Servants. I deceived my-Self, however, for Ldid not See him till the next day at noon ; when, with his fine hair diSheveled, his eyes Swelled out of his head, and his ruffles all j stained with claret, he entered my dressing-room, j faying, “ My dear 1 beg your pardon, but I have I been amongst a Sett of mad fellows, who have
kept
ao4 The MEMOIRS of kept me up all night a drinking, which I hate,” Said he, gaping and stretching himlelst The figure he then made excited my pity ; and ihe litt e arts his vices reduced him to the neccstlty ot making uSe of, almost railed my contempt; yet 1 was pleafed to..fiml, that he had still delicacy enough left to wifn to conceal his faults from me ; 1 therefore accepted the excuSe, and, with a half Smile,, told him, ** That I could not be fo cruel as to upbraid him, fince his crime, I perceived, had brought its punistiment along with it; for I thought he looked very ill.’* He replied, ** T hat he was fo in reality, and would therefore go and lay down upon the bed for an hour or two, in hopes that a little steep would coropoSe his head, and do him good.”
From this period, during a Series of feme months, I never faw him but he either in licjuor, or in fuch a state of low fpirits and ill humour, as rendered it impostible for me, either to do or fay any thing to pleafe him ; nay, I often thought that the very Sight of me irritated his bile, and made him crofs; and perhaps that might be the reafon why he was fo much from me; for he very Seldom lay .at home, and, unleSs Sometimes by chance, 1 hardly ever Spent a quarter of an hour in his company. At rny deSirewe had long stept in leparaie apartments: T odiSguiSe the real reaSori for my making this request, 1 alledged, “ That ilie late hours he kept disturbed nte; and that when he was a little heated with wine, it was much more eligible to steep alone, than to be tumbled into my bed by two footmen, which had been Several times the cafe ” To thefe .srgiiments he brought no manner of opposttion, but, on thecontraiy, acknov/-iedged them just, and readily agreed to my proposal.
Mrs. WILLIAMS.	205
Sal. 1 believe he thought I never reaSoned belter in my life, than I did at that moment.
I found mystlf now as much difengaged, and my lime as much my own, as if I had not been married; a situation which, to Some of my Sex, would, I make no doubt, have had its charms; but it had none for me ; 1 was too w retched to re-lifh public places, cards 1 dilliked, and visits of ceremony had ever been rny aversion ; thus disqualified for entering into the gay w orld, I Ipent most of my time with my books at home, as 1 feldom went out, unlefs it was to fee one or two of my nearest neighbours, amongst whom there was a widow lady, of about forty years of age, a fenfi-blt, well-bred woman; her name was Madam Bertram ; ste had Spent her youth between Paris and Fer/ailtef i her hulband was a lieutenant-general, £>nd, on his death, She bad retired to the place of her birtii, which was Marjeilles. This Ldy had conceived a friendstij^ for me, and ufed frequently, by her lively and agreeable conversation, to diffipate, at least in Some meafure, the chagrin which devoured me : She w ould often, good-humouredly, chide me for being Such a recluSe, but never enquired into the reafons which induced me to be lo ; this prudent rderve of her’s endeared her to me; for, as I never could have brought myfelf to reveal my hufhand’s faults, ue must probably have quairelled, had (he been more inquisitive : However, 1 believe site had too much penetration not to gutfs at the caufe of my melancholy.
One day, when our converfation bad taken a moral turn, fhe laid, “ 'Thar, according to her apprehension of things, ste thought that the falSe prejudices we imbibed in our iniancy, like Original Sin, w ere the true caufesof our iuture mifery ;
for.
2o6	Th e M E M O I R S o f
for, (continued the) we are always hearing that fuch a road leads to happineSs ; that if we do fo and fo, we Shall be as happy as the day is long. . Thus happineSs is always pointed out to us as a gaol to which numbers daily arrive, when, in st<5f, there is no fuch thing to be found on earth ; nor in my opinion, did the Great Difpofer of all Things ever intend it as an appendage to his creature, Man ; but, on the contrary, has made this world a ssate of probation, in which he is, from his fufferings and fortitude in bearing them, to merit a better existence hereafter. Now, (continued (he) were we to begin life with this idea, the truth of which experience will infallibly teach us, I am of opinion that we Should revolt leSs against misfortune when they befel us, and rejoice more heartily at any agreeable event which might arrive, than we do at prefent, whilst we think happinefs attainable, and that we are injured if it does not fall to our lot. Another great error of the human mind, (faid (he,) is, that we fuppofe our nature to be more perfect than it is, and consequently wonder that any one (hould ufe us ill ; that they fhould, under the mafkof friendfhip and benevolence, betray and injure us, is matter of astonilhment to our fenfes, when just entered upon the stage of life ; to avoid which, 1 think La	or, rather,
ophrajiuds maxim, fhould be early taught young people, which fays*, Let us not be angry with mankind, on feeing their hardnefs o£ heart, their ingratitude, their injustice, their pride, their love of themfelves, and difregard of others; they were
* Ne nous emportons point e'^ntre les hommes en voyant leur durete, leur ingratitude, leur injuftice, leur fierte, I’amour d’eux memes et I’cubli des autres •, iU font ainfi faits, e’eft leur nature, e’eft ne pouvoir fupporter, que la pierre tombe, ou que le feu s’eleve.
made
M R s. W I L L I A M S.	207
made So; it is their nature; one might as welt be angry at the stone for falling, or the fire foraScend-ingS’I eaSily perceived the drift of my friend’s dist -coiirfe, and told her, I stegged leave to obferve,
“ That La Bruyerh characters were Sometimes painted too strong, and always traced by the hand of mifanthropy.”- She replied, “ That perhaps the colouring might Sometimes be too high, but that thecanvas was always truth.”
About this time there arrived at Marfeilks, on his road to Italy, a young EngUJh Nobleman, of an agreeable figure and genteel addrefs: I had known him a boy in England ; he claimed acquaintance with me, and, in confeqiience, paid me a visit, which Mr. Williams returned, and astured his Lofdstiip, that both himlelf and wife would always be glad of the honor of his company ; accordingly he came very often to our houfe, both by invitation and without. I oblcrved, that Mr. Williams affected to leave his Lordstiip and me together as much as possible, and would even frequently find an excufe for being from home, when he had invited this young Nobleman to dinner, and I knew nothing of it, tilllfaw him enter the room. A repetition of this fort of behaviour began tostiock me, as I thought I Saw by it, that ' rny hufband wifhed me to have an intrigue, or at least the reputation of having one, with this young Gentleman. Alarmed by this fufpicion, I determined to be upon my guard ; in order to which,
I gave orders, the next day, that I would never
he at home to Lord---------, but when Mr. Wtl- \
Hams was at home. By this means, his LordShip bad been frequently retufed the door; when one day my hufband faid to me, “ 1 am just come from
Lord -------, w'ho complains much that you are !
always out. ] told his Lordlhip, he must be mistaken, I
2o3 The M E M O I R S o f taken, for J really believed there was not a woman in France who stayed half lo much at home as you didThen looking at me, he added, How happens this. Madam?” I replied, “ It is very eaSily accounted for. Sir ; Since your being always out, makes me careful of the vifltors I receive at heme and I have therefore determined to admit none but thofe who are of my own Sex, when you are abfent, that I may, at least, not draw' upon rayftlf the cenrufe of the world.” “ My God, what a prude you are grown! (exclaimed he.) Why, one would think you had been educated in Spain!” “ There was a time (I anfwered, with a. Sigh) when Such a rtferved condudl w'ould have been (if not ridiculous), at least unnetestary.; but' when a woman has the misfortune to be negledicd by the object of her affeClions, the world is apt to fuppofe, that She will feek.either her confolation or revenge in forming another attachment ; now as this manner of shewing my (enSibility of the in-^ jury is both foreign to my principles and heart, I shall ufe all the precautions in my power to prevent its being attributed to me.” Here I pauftd ; he, whistling. Said, “ You are yourown mistrefs. Madam, and therefore may do what you pleaSe ; I. have no notion of lellraioiog any body’s inclinations, not Iand fo faying, he went out of the room. A few days after lists, Mr. Williams io\d me, that Lord • ■ — would lup with us that, evening j ‘‘ And, in order not to wound your Superlative delicacy, Madam, (fays he,) I will most certainly be at home.” I replied, “ It was very I well;” adding, “ that I thought his Lordship a very agreeable, entertaining companion, and should be always glad to fee him,,when I could do it with
propriety.” In the afternoon Loid----------came,
according to appointment, and Mr. Williams was
at
«
AI R s. WILLIAM S.	209
at home to receive him. The former ‘part of the evening past agrceal)ly cnougli, till, unfortunately,
I happened to have the head ach, and foolilhly Said, laying my hand upon my forehead, “ Good God, I wish my head was cfi, it aches fo, that it makes me quite Siupid !”*' God forbid, (exclaimed Lord ——,) I would not have it hurt for a thoufand pounds; there are very tew to be found fo well toriftru£l:ed as it is.” I Smilingly replied, “ Your Lordship is very obliging, to let fo great a value upon it; but I, who am better acquainted with it than you are, and know its defefis, think it of very little confequence whether it is off, or on.” Mr. Williams ohhxyedf “ That he did not believe any woman’s head could be worth five pounds; and that their whole perfon could never amount to the value of the Sum his Lordstiip had Set upon my head only.” This he Said, laughing. My Lord replied, in the Same tone, “ Why, Mr. Williamt, I am Sure you w'ould not be willing to part with. your Lady for a thoufand pounds, though you would Seem to hold her in So little estimation.” “ Indeed, my Lord, but I would, (anfwered Mr. Williams,) and that with all my heart; as I, at jrefent, want money, much more than I do my wiie.” The manner in which my hulband Spoke iriefe words piqued me to the Soul; and I felt my creeks glow with rcfentmeni and indignation : I laid nothing, however ; but, ariSing from my feat, went to the window. “ You would be very for-IV to be taken at your word,” (Said Lord — ■ to hir. Williams, continuing the conversation.) “ Not in the least, (replied the latter,) and, as a proof that 1 am in earnest, 1 will, this moment, ling for per, ink, and paper, and confirm, under my hand, the exchange 1 offered you.” He then
rang the bell ; Lord --- looked lurprized, yet
still
210 The MEMOIRS of
ssili (I believe) thought him in joke. When the Servant brought the paper, <kc. Mr. Williams Said, “ Well, my Lord, do you diaw upon your Banker for a thoufand pounds, and I will give you a formal renunciation of all my right and title to the perfon of my wife, in your favour, to which I will fet my hand and fealwhich accordingly lie did ;
and Lord ------prefented him w'ith the draught
for the money. I fat all this while stupified with ailonilhment at this extraordinary Scene, and once interrupted them by faying, “ Thai Mr. IVil-liamd% having renounced all right and title to me, could not make me become the property of another, but only left me mistrefs of myfelt.” I'his I Said betvveen anger and jell, not being able to conceive my hulband could polSibly be lerious in fuch an affair; I, therefore, expedled every moment to fee the papers flung into the fire, and the faice finish ; but how was I amazed, when I Saw Mr. Williams put the note into his pocket, and, advancing towards me, take my hand, which he
immediately attempted to pot into Imrd *--’s,
faying, “ There, Madam, I refign you to that Gentleman, hoping that he will make you a better hushand than I have done.*’ I drew my hand, with precipitation, from him, and, looking in his face with an air of anger and contempt, faid,
“ Bafe, and inhuman man; you have, indeed ruined both my peace and fortune, but my honor’s my own, and whilll I preferve it unfullied, I flatter myfelf that it will raife me above your infolent ulage of me, as well as the bafe machinations, you have, and may hereafter make ufe of, in order to level me w ith yourfcll, and youi dirty connec- -tions.” “ As to you, my Lord, (I Said, turning to him,) I am fenfible, that as a man of gallantry, you could not refufe a Lady, when fite was offered
to
Mrs. william S.	an
to )'oti} I therefore have no reproaches to make you upon the Subje61, eSpecially as 1 have a right to hope, that your Lordfhip’s opinion of me was of a nature, not to admit of a thought injurious to my honor; I therefore fuppofe, that you looked upon the ridiculous fcene, which has just past, as 1 did,* comme unjeu Fenfans; I (hall most certainly take care, that your draught for the money stall be returned to you to-morrow morning, and 1 beg your Lordlhip will oblige me, by not iuffer-ing any part of this foolist, unguarded a£lion, of Mr. IViUiams, to tranfpire.” He gave me his word of honor that he would not ; and.then, with a refpeCtful bow, prefented me wiih my hustand’s deed of conveyance of me to his Lordstip; at the fame time protesting to me, “ That a right over my perfon, without having an interest in my heart, was an honor to which he had never afpired he therefore begged leave to assure me, that he had never prefumed to have a thought which could give the Smallest wound to my delicacy; adding, “ that he hoped I would have the good-nefs to pardon his having been the innocent cauSe of giving me pain. To which I replied, “ That I did not think his Lordstip in the least to blame.” Mr. WiUiamSy who had, no doubt, listened to this conversation, when it was over attempted to appear with his ufualair of cafe and gaiety, but I could perceive, that the latter part ot the fcene had not afforded him much entertainment. Lord-------faw it, as well as me,
and therefore very prudently went away, almost as foon as Supper was over.
When he was gone, I fat myfelf down in an elbow chair, oppoSite my hustand, whom lasted in a
* Childrens play.
calm.
212 The me M OIRS o
Calm, but firm voice, “ How he would have adltcT was he in my place, and had juft been treated in the ignominious manner ! had been?’* He looked Surprized at the question, and then anfwered, care-leSsly, “ Why 1 Thould have gone with Lord—
I replied, “ I dare lay y-ou would.” I then told him, that r must inSist on his giving me the note for thethouiand pounds, in onler that I might fend it’back early in the morning to his Lordfhip ; He refuSed it Saying, “ That he wanted the money now, and would pay it al his leifure.” I endeavoured to Shew him both the meanneSs and impropriety of Such a proceeding: He anfwered, ** That NecelTity had no Law ; and that he must either have that money, or go to prifon.” I Said, Slook-ing at him, and fhaking my bead) ** Unhappy,, mistaken, man! thefe are the^ifficulties into w'hich vice plunges all her votaries. Do you think, (continued I) that the companions of your riots, for whofe fakes you have facristced your health, reputation, and fortune, will either astist or confole you in the hour of adverstty and affliftion ? No, believe me, Mr. Williams, a vicious heart is equally incapable of pity, as of generofity ; and friendship is the offspring of virtue alone : Don’t, therefore, flatter yourleh that you have any frienff toapplyto hi your prefenl distrefs; the worthy part of your acquaintance will think it unpardonable to Support you in the purluit of your debaueheries; and the others will fly from the man, who can no longer gratify their appetites ; even your Fatime's, love of you, IS not, I fancy, of that refined nature, as to stand the test of poverty and a prdon. There was a time, Mr. Williams, when to me the deferts of Libya, or the most loathlomejail, would have been divested of their terrors, by the char.ms of your Society . but a long Iciics of (htferings, and ill
Ucatment,
Mrs. WI L L I AMS.	213
•treatment, have at last, restored me, in Some measure, to reaSon ; or rather, perhaps, I am obliged to defpair for Some part of iny cure : For whilst I had the least; Temaming hope of reclaiming you by my patience and tenderneSs, I Suffered from every negle^, or unkind look of your’s, pangs which voiir unfeeling heart can never know ; but as Soon as I was convinced, to demonstration, that you had renounced every virtue which adorns humanitv^ and adopted every vice which diihonours it, 1 ceafed attempting to stem the torrent ; ar.H, turning my eyes inward, Sought peace in my own breast, lince 1 found it denied me every where elle. I never meant to upbraid you Mr. IViliiams, nor Should do it now, only to justify the step lam going to take, which is that of leparating inySelf from you ; your contemptuous neglect of me, would never have induced me to have left you but I am now convinced, that my honor is not Sate in your hands; therefore the duty I owe both to mySdfand Samily, obliges me to leave your roof, and to Seek an afylum in the arms oS my relations and friends in Englandd*
Here I ended this long harangue, to w hich he made no kind of aniwer, either by fign or word, but lat stienr, looking attentively at the fire; So finding he did not chuSe to talk, I took one of his hands, and putting it to my mouth, I kisted it, laying, with a Sigh, which rent my boSom, Good night, my once dear Georgef’’ I then hastened out of the room as quick as I could, for Sear he (hould perceive, l^y my tailing tears, how falSely 1 had boasted of an inlenSibility, my heart was, in reality, a stranger to, with regard to him. I now went to bed, but not to steep; I revolved in my mind all that had passed that evening, and was weaic
enough
214 The MEMOIRS of enough to upbraid mySelf for having Spoke to my hufband, in terms, which, I feared, might have given him pain ; it is true, I had determined to leave him, but then, byfodoing, I was thoroughly perfuaded, that I Should caufe him no uneaSineSs; for which reafon, I was at a lofs to find out to what I ought to attribute his obstinate Silence, during the whole time that I was telling him of his faults; in fhort, I wasapprehenfive that I had both offended and vexed liim, and that thought kept me upon the rack till morning, when I Sent me love to him, and deSired to know how he did ? My maid returning Said, Madam, my master has not been in bed last night, nor has he ever quitted the parlour Since you left him in it, and I think he looks like death,” continued the girl. “ Good God, (I replied,) is it poffible ! What can be the matter with him ? How does he do? What did he fay ?” All thefe questions! aSked in a breath ; to which my maid anfwered, “ Madam, my master fends his love to you, thanks you for your obliging enquiries after his health, and Says he is as well as he ever wisties to be, and bid me give you this paper, deSiring you to difpofe of it as you Shall think proper.” On looking at it, I found it was Lord
-----’s draught for the sthoufand pounds, which I
immediately Sealed up, with a compliment, and Sent to his LordShip. I then wenttoviSit my hufband : I found him writing ; upon which I heSi-tated a moment at the door, being doubtful whether I ought to interrupt him or not ; when, perceiving me, he (aid in a faint voice, “ Come in. Madam, I have now no Secrets w hich I would wisti to conceal from you.” He got up and reached me a chair ; when we were both Seated, Mrs. Wil-Hams, (Says he,) I was writing to my father, giving him an account of the reafons and cauSes of this
our
Mrs. W I L L I a M S.	215
our fatal Separation from each other. I beg, Madam, that you will be fo obliging as to deliver it yourfelf into my father’s own hand, as it will entirely exculpate you, in his and ray mother’s opinion, of any errors in my conduct, of which they may have thought you the author ; this is now the only reparation that remains in my power to make you, Charlotte, for all the injuries! have done yoti and which are much more numerous than your generous nature ever could fuppofe them to be io faying, he put his handkerchief to his eyes, which, I could perceive,' very full of water ; he then prefented to me tiie letter lie had been writing to liis father, deSiring me, at the fame time to read it : I did ib : It contained a minute detail of all tlie falSities which he had told him, and his mother, of me, accuSmg himfelf of being the Sole author of all the indiscretions which he h.'id committed ssnce his marriage ; he then Shows them how coniraryjo my opinion, nay, even to my entreaties the greateH; part ot hiscondu<!iI had been Since our union ; he proceeds to praiSe ray prudence, patience bcc. and then flies out into invectives against his father, upi^raiding hira with being the original caufe of his ruin, Irom his penury, by always straitening hira in iiis circumstances in the first place, and In the Second, by engaging him to part with his wife, who was the most perfe6l model of human p^rfeUion ; he tells him, that now the measure of his follies, as well as his calamities, are full} that life is no longer Supportable, fince he has lost nil which rendered it dcfiral)lej his belov. ed Charlotte ; he begs he would obferve, that he now renounces all lies of blood for the future, with a man who has brought all his misfortunes upon him, as well as all forts of connexion whatfoever, tilher with him, or any of his family ; he then recommends
2i6 The MEMOIRS of cotTimendJ me strongly to his care and proteclion and ends, by bidding him farewell for ever.
I cannot paint to you, my dear Adelaide, my af-tonistiment, on having peruSed this extraordinary composition, which, as Soon as I had read, Mr. WAiams Sealed and delivered to me, with a look of inestable tendernefs and contrition. I was at a loSswhat to think of this Scene; I knew my huS-band to have a great deal of art, and I did not think this luddcn change of Sc-ntiment and condust very natural, as I was tlioroughiy convinced, that he had long cealed to love me, I took the letter, however, laying, “ I found mySelf much edified at his candour and generoiity, but that I begged he would believe me to be incapable of making uSe of them to his difadvantage ; (adding,) that the approbation of my own heart, I hoped, would be found Sufficient to Support me thro’ the painful conSlicI I must Suffer, in parting with him, as well - as the ccnSequences it might be attended with. I faid, I could never think of raifing my own fame on the ruins of his, and therefore Should make no life of the letter he had just given me.” I now begged of him to go to bed : He looked wildly at me, and anfwered, “ You are loo good, Charlotte", Why do you concern yourfelf about Such a lost wretch as I am ?” I assured him, that on his health and welfare, depended, in a great meaSure, ail my future peace ; 1 therefore inticated In n, for my Sake, to take care of himSelS, and to let me conduct him into his room ; for, in truth, he looked as if he was hardly able to stand, grief and want of steep had So fatigued him. At last he complied and I led him up stairs, where, after f aving aided him to pull off his coat, he got into bed. 1 then drew the curtains round him, and f.tt myfcU down on a chair by his bedSide, as I really thought him
ill.'
Mrs. williams.	217
ill. He Seemed much agitated, and could not get to deep. I took hold of his hand Several times, and found it hot; I now grew apprehenSive that he was going to have a violent fever, I therefore Sent immediately for a Phydcian, who, on feeing him, ordered he should be bled dire6lly, faying.
He found his pulfe very irregular and feverish.’* Draughts, See. were preferibed. I never quitted Mr. Williams all that day, or the following night; he raved a good deal about Fatime^ called her all forts of names, the most injurious he could think of Sometimes, and then he would fancy her with him, and talk to her in terms of the tenderest kind; in short, he continued light-headed with the violence of the fever, till the fourth day after his being taken ill; when, towards the morning, he stept quietly for two hours, and then awaked, Seemingly much calmer and cooler than he had been ssnee the beginning of his illnefs.
During all this interval of time, my mind was a perfect chaos : Grief, pity, refentment, love, reafon, and passion, were all at war in my breast. I had no friend to confult; none to whom I could unbofom the Sorrows which oppressed me, and from whofe Salutary counfel I might have hoped to have found confolation. I therefore looked up to Heaven, begging his aid, who is the never failing comfort of his afstided creatures, when they addrefs him with a heart free from guilt. Such was mine. Mr. Williams now grew viSibly better. 1 must not forget to tell you, that during the courfe of his indifpoSiiion, Several letters had been Sent to him by his mistrefs, which, now he was recovering, I ventured to give him ; and, in order that he might read them witli the more conveniency, 1 retired to the other end of the room. After having perufed, them, he called me to him : I went j VoL. II.	F	He
2i8 The M E M O I R S o f
He took my hand, and, grafping it tenderly., hte Said, with a voice oi defpair, “ I fee I am undone., past recovery, Since you can give me thefe letters without any emotion. To what a degree of contempt and indifSerence must I be fallen in your opinion, when you can be thus infenSible on fuch an occaSion r” I replied, “ That ufe reconciled one to the greatest misfortunes; (adding,) that Since I had lost his heart, it was very immaterial to me who postested it.” “ Cruel, inhuman Charlotte^ (continued he,) you injure me ! I never ceafed one moment to love you ; but an unpardonable levity in my nature, which has been strengthened by the prejudices of a falfe education, have, together, contributed to lead my fenfes into eirors my heart has ever been a stranger to. No, no, my lovely, my ever dear girl, (continued he, pulling me upon the bed to him,) by all that Saints hold Sacred, you are, and ever was, the only and foie mistrefs of my heart.” I struggled to diSengage myfelf from his arms, which, with Some difficulty, I accomplished, and refeated myfelf on a chair by his bedside. He now began, in the most pathetic terms, to implore my forgivenefs of all the wrongs I had fuffered ; when, to shew me the thorough contrition he had, for having lo cruelly inflidted them on | me, he confessed all the errors of his past life ;	'
amongst which, as he had before well obferved, there were many which 1 should never have fuf-pedied him to have been guilty of : His intrigue with Mifs Beauford was not omitted, nor were thofe with twenty other Miffes, whole names I have forgot; and I am glad of it. Since it is not my intention lotxpofe them. When he had ended his confeshon, which was long, and charged with the most ridiculous events,! told him what I knew of his intimacy with Mifs Beauford\ at which he
appeared
Mrs. WILLIAMS. 219 appeared Surprized, as he had never fuSpecled my having any Sufpicion of it. Me now made the warmest encomiums on my discretion and goodneSs, at the fame time accufmg himSelf of being the un-worthiest of mankind ; he Said he was a rtf)tilc, tiot deServing the honor of crawling at my feet ; he begged me to crush him at once, by denying him pardon, and So put an end to all his torments, as he neither could, nor would, live without me. He Swore he was absolutely determined, that very day, to Send Fatime back to Paris, protesting, that he should never more be able to bear either her fight or name, Since she had, at least in a great meaSure, been the cau'fe of his lofing his dearest wife; he lamented his past crimes, declared his abhorrence of them, and vowed a future amendment. In short, there was not an art he left uneffayed, in order to move my tendernefs, companion, and humanity; he knelt, wept, Swore, intreated, menaced his own life, and, in a word, wrought upon my ast'e61ions So forcibly, that I funk into his arms, forgave him all his past faults, and, from a motive of generoSity, burnt his letter tohis father, as well as the deed of gift he had
made of me to Lord---------, in order that there
should be no vestiges remaining, which were in my power to destroy, of his former ill condudl. From this period, he became the fondest, tender-est. Soberest of hushands ; he Sent away his mil-trefs as he had promiied, wdih an intention, as I firmly believed, never to fee her moie, and wiih-out having taken leave of her, as he assured me.
I have been So totally‘abSorbed in the narration ©f this interesting part of my history, Adelaide,, as to have forgot informing you, that, not long after our arrival at Marfeilles, 1 had received a letter Charles Stanly, to acquaint me, that So-F 2	phis
220	T H E M E M O I R S O F	j
phie and he were one. My Sister, too, wrote up- * on the occaSion, She tells me, that her preSent ' happinels is fo gieat, that (he can hardly perfuade j herfelf of its reality, Amidst all my forrows this event gave me pleafure.
I now return to that part of my story from whence I broke off. It was fix weeks or two months, since Mr. fViltiams^s reformation, when one evening, that he and I were alone, (which now frequently happened, at his own desire,) I obferved to him, that I thought he was graver than ufual; he replied, with a sigh, I was refleQing on the enormity, as well as abfurdity, of my paft conduct, my Dear.” I was going to reply, when he continued, faying, “ but I am Sufficiently puniffied for my faults, by the Severity with which I now feel the confequenccs of them.” Here I interupted him, by alking, with trepidation, “ If any misfortune had befallen him ?” “None, but Such as I have drawn upon myfelf, (fays he ;) since, in order to Support my follies and extravagancies, I am involved under Such a load of debt, as will be impoffible for me to extricate myfelf from, unlefs I go over to England f and fo remit the money from thence; and even this I cannot do, unlefs my creditors will take my promissory notes for their iecurity, till I can pay the money, and that I am afraid they will j never be brought to content to ; as, when once	,
I am out of the kingdom, they have nothing to re-	j
ly on but my honor, for the payment of their bills; there is, however, (continued he,) nothing left for it, but to try thena ; if they come into the propo-fal, why well; if not, apiilol must decide the buss nefs ; for I neither can, nor will, ever Submit to be crammed into a French jail, by fuch rafcals,”
“ Alas! (cried I, turning my eyes up to Heaven) am 1 then never to know peace I How can you
talk
Mrs. williams.	221
talk in Such a manner, Mr. Williams ? You frighten me almost out of iny fenSes!” Here he took hold of my hand, faying, “ The Sorrows my in-diferetions have brought upon you, my good girl, are infinitely more affli<siing to me, than any of my own; there, there, (Said he,) is the wound,’* (striking his breast with his hand, in a Seeming agony.) I now uSed every argument in my power toconfole him ; I begged he would immediately endeavour to get leave of his creditors, to go over to England, promising them proper Security for their money in a limited time after his arrival there. He told me, that he would call them together the next day, and offer the propofal to them. I then begged of him to make his mind as eafy as he could, assuring him, “ That my happinefs was centred in the pol-fession of his love and friendihip, and that whilst I enjoyed them, I w-as invulnerable to all the attacks of adverfe fortune.*’ He replied, “ That I was in every thing the delight and confolation of his life.”
Two days after this converfation Mr. Williams acquainted me, “ That he had now an opportunity of fettling his affairs with the people he owed money to, but (added he) it is upon a condition of So cruel a nature, that I do not know whether I had not rather go to prifon than ctxnply with it; nay, I have a great mind, (laid he, starting up from the chair he was Sitting on,) to go to them this moment and tell them, that they may do their worst; when letting himfelf fall gently into his fiat again, he faid, (in a foft, plaintive voice,) they fhall not oblige me to give up what is dearer to me than life, or liberty, I mean your company my dear Charktted* “ My company, (I replied,) Mr. Williams ! what can my company have to do with your creditors?’* —“ Why, my love, (Said he) the fellows I have F 3	to
222 The memoirs op to deal with, are a pack of mechanical Scoundrefsy who have no notion of taking a Gentleman’s wordj for which reafon, they yesserdjy, at a meeting we had, unanimoufly agreed, that, iinlefs I left you, my Angel, behind me, as a pledge for my return, they would never confent to my quilting the town, much lefs the kingdom ; but, I am absolutely determined never to comply with this, their unreasonable propofai, (Said myhufband,) and fo I know what I have to e.xpetl.” Here he ceafcd Speaking, and looked at me, as if he wilhed me to give my fentimients upon the fubje6l. I did fo, by telling him, “ That I was but too fenfible how cruel the Separation from him would be to me ; I obferved, that the being left alone in a foreign country, fo many hundred leagues from all my friends and relations, wasa painful consideration f but in the dreadful alternative which now preiented itfelf to my view 1 added, I could not heSitate in the choice, Since I most certainly prefered the being miserable mySelf, to the torture of feeing him lb ; I therefore begged of him to go irnmiediately to England, and leave me as a hostage for his honor, Since a jail must be the inevitable conSequence of his non-compliance with this article of the convention made with his creditors.” When I had done (peaking, he caught me in his arms, presttd me to his bolom, and (aid all that Gratitude, SenSibiliiy, and Love could dictate ; admired my generofity, praiSed my fortitude and thanked me at least a thouland times, for the confidence 1 had fo nobly placed in him; in stiort, the next day he packed up what was just necessary tor his journey, and, wiili only one (ervant to attend him, Set off for Paris, (rom whence he was to go direOly to Calais, and fo on to London.
1 took leave of Mr. IVilliams with an unufual depression of Spirits; I tell as if my foul was, at
that
Mrs. williams:	225'
that moment, Separated from my body : I gazed on him with unutterable tendtrneSs and Sorrow, and, dinging myfelf on my kneer, I intreated him to remember, that my lile depended on his welfare, and my peace and happinefs on his fpeedy return. I repreSented to him the deplorable Situation in which he now left me, without friends, and with very little money, and lefs credit. I conjured him to continue to love me, to take care of himlelf; and then, holding him fast by one of his hands,- which I pressed between both mine, my eyes streaming with tears, and my heart almost bursting my breast, ss bid him adieu, and, in that moment, I thought I-did So for ever.
Reafon, though She had long been Silenced, by the power of affedion, yet,, now and then, would give a feeble tap at my breast ; and it was She, doubilefs, who prophested in the moment I am Speaking of; the had frequently tried to awaken me from the profound lethargy my hufband’s apparent reformation had thrown me into ; but I Suppressed all her admonitions, rather chuSingto give way to an illuSion, which, whilst it lasted, was pleaSing, than to Suffer prudence to create doubts in my mind, which must infallibly have damped the present enjoyment ; not conssdering, (as I ought to have done,) that the man who only falls from his level, will probably hurt himSelf much le'Ss, than he who tumbles off a precipice. I h;:ve found this resseCiion, however, of Singular lervice to me, on many occaSions Since. But to my stoiy.
As Soon as my huSband was gone, I drew my ex-pences into as narrow a compals as 1 poffibly could; but, as he had left me only ten guineas in cafh, he could not expedt it to last very long ; however, as I had ten of my own, which 1 had faved, rather than purchaSe a gown with it (for wistch purpoSe F 4	Mr.
224	T H E M E M O I R S o F
Mr. Williams had given it me,) I flattered myfelfi that, with good oeconomy, I might make this Sum hold out till his return, which he had promifed, and Swore, fhould be in Six weeks at farthest. I was now left at leifure, to revolve over, in my memory, all the occurrences of my past life, which, in order to do with the more preciSion, I put them down upon paper; and, it is from theSc papers, that I now coliefif (in a great meafure at least) the fa6ls which I here narrate to you. Upon examining the tranfa£fions of a few months past, I could not avoid condemning, in my own opinion, my too great eaSinefsof temper, as well as difinle-restcdnefs, on Several occaSions. I forcfaw, with terror, the confequences which might refult from Such a condu6l ; yet I wished to think well of the man I loved, though I could not difguife to my reafon, that I had a£Ied imprudently, in having placed fo unreferved a confidence in Mr. Wtll'iams.
The first letter I received from him was dated Paris; he tells me in it, “ That he has only just stopped there to change horfes, Such is his impatience to arrive in England^ in order that he may finish his affairs the quicker, and, consequently, return the Sooner to me ; fays he is in a violent hurry, and concludes, your’s, G. W.’^—I thought his stile cool and laconic, but attributed it to his being fatigued, and perhaps pressed tor time. The next I had from him was dated London ; in it he tells me, “ That he finds a great deal of difficulty in raiSing the money j that his father is much out of humour with him upon the old fubje6I; and that, in short, he is almost mad, not knowing what in the world to do ; he adds, however, that he is determined to bring the old man to terms by one means or other ; Nay, (fays he,) I will Swear that I’ll fire through my head, if he don’t relieve met
This
M R s. W I L L I A M S. 225
This threat, I fancy, will frighten him out of his money, and then I Shall instantly fly to my dear girl, on the wings of affeclion, as her abfence is the greatest of all evils: He then intreats of me to {ceep up my Spirits, and promifes not to exceed the fix weeks leave of ahfence (as he calls it).” This letter quieted, in Some meafure, my fears, and a Second, third, and fourth, of the fame nature, lulled me into perfe6l tranquillity. The people, to whom he owed money, viSited me frequently, always enquiring when I expeQed Mr. IVilliams home ? I read them feveral paragraphs in his letters, which Seemed to keep them in tolerable good humour, and by my treating them always with candour and civility, they contraHed a kind of ef-teem for me, which turned out to be of Singular Service.
I had now pasted a fortnight without having received a line from my hufband ; when one day, that I was fitting alone, my footman came into the room, and prefenied me with a packet of letters from England. I immediately fought for Mr. Wil-liams's hand, and, having found it. Selected it from the rest, my heart palpitating with the hope, that, as his time of abfence was elapfed within a day or two, he would there mention the day he purpofed to return. I broke the Seal with precipitation, and read as follows:
“ Madam, I beg, for your own peace, you would forget that I am your hulband, as I have forgot that you are my wife ; I have done my endeavours to engage your father to take you home to his houfe, but found him absolutely averfe to any propofal of this kind, nay, indeed, he pofitively Said he would have nothing to do with you. Now, Madam, as I know you have a great fhare of stoical philofophy, I Sincerely wish it may be of stf-F 5	vici
226 The M E M O I R S o f
vice to you in your preScnt critical Situation. H you will make a proper life of your understanding* you may, for aught I know, be much happier than you have ever been Since we were united ; you are handfome, young, and agreeable ; with thefe qualities, you cannot fail of finding friends; and I don’t counfel you to pra6Iife virtues, which 1 my-felf cannot attain to. lam, Madam, your friend, and obedient Servant, G. IV.
Pojijcript. I have no Money, So cannot remit any at the prefent ; however, you may always depend on Sharing my fortune with you; the half of it Shall be ycur’s, let its augmentation be ever fo great. I leave	this morning ; it is no mat-
ter where I am going ; any letters you may choofe to honor me with, will find me, by befng directed to me at —■—■—--------—, Ftq ; in the Temple ;
'* Mais, pour rumour de DieUy point de tragiquCy ' ma ChereS'*
I had no Sooner read this letter, than I imagined that lomebody gave me a violent stroke crtils the breast, a stalh of ligtening feenied to have gone crofs my eyes, and I fell l» nfelefs upon the floor ; from this time, nil Several days attervx ards, I knew nothing which happened to me. When one morning 1 perceived, by the glimmering of returning Senfe, that I was in a darkifh room, and in bed. 1 afkfcd, “ Who was there ?” and wasanfwered, by a Soft female voice, “ My dear Mrs. IVilliams^ I am here, and fincerly rejoice to hear you Speak ;
1 did not, indeed think 1 ever Should have had that pleafnre again ; do not offer to talk, Madam, (continued the voice) you are very ill, but be affured, that you are amongst your friends, who will, with pleafure, take every imaginable care of you.” The
* But for God's f»ke, don’t be tragical, my Dear.
confuSion
Mrs. W I L L LA M S.	227
conSuSion of my ideas, joined to the weaknefs of my body, rendered me, at that time, incapable of understanding what my guardian angel (aid to me ; I therefore made no reply, (as I have ssnce been told,) for then I knew nothing of the matter ; the violence of the fever had Seized my head. So that, happily, I felt no idea forcibly enough to give me uneaSinefs. I was, during the greatest part of my illneSs, almost continually tsteep ; from this state of negative happinefs they cruelly rouSed me, by the force of medicine, accompanied with tlte most: astiduous and tender care of me: As my health returned, my fenfes, by degrees, recovered their vigour alfo and by that means plunged me again into the deepest defpair. An old PhySician of merit, who attended me during my illnefs, told me one day, He perceived, with infinite concern, that rry difeast at prefent lay in the mind, and for that reafon, it was out of the reach of his art to cure ; he begged I would-be ray own Doiflor, fince it was in my power to do myfelf more good in one day, than all the Faculty together, could do in a twelve-month,’"'
I now knew my charitable, kind nurfe, to be my neighbour. Madam Bertram, and, on feeing her stand at the foot of my bed, 1 afked her, ‘‘ How fhe came there?” She told me, with a Smile, ‘‘ That fhe had never quitted my room for a moment, Since the day on which I was taken ill, and that fhe even stept in it, as I might fee if I opened my curtain, as h.er bed was placed clofe to mine.” I then begged of her to narrate to me, what had liappened Since the moment that I had lost my fen-fes. She told me, “ That my maid, going into the parlour, about ten minutes after the footman had delivered the letters to me, found me (as fhe then tl'iought,) dead upon the floor. The poor
girl
228 TheMEMOIRSof girl shrieked out, which brought the other lervanf® to her alSissance; they immediately laid you upon a bed, and fern for a Surgeon, at the fame time that your maid came to me, wringing her hands, and crying out, that she had loll her dear, good mlflrefs! The girl frighted me exceshvely, as you may fuppofe, (faid Madame Bertram ) I ashed her what she meant ? She replied, “ Come and fee. Madam ; pray come and fee my Lady deadf” I followed the girl home, where I found you. Madam, in the Surgeon’s hands. Seemingly hfe-lefs: He was opening a vein, which bled a little ; he then ordered you to be put to bed, and deSired aPhyfician might immediately be Sent for. He was fo. I ashed him, “ What he thought of you He shook his head, and anfwered, “ He would tell me more of his mind the next day.” The violence of your fever, together with the deliriurrr which attended tt, alarmed us all, for Several days, especially as the Doctors declared you in a vety dangerous state. You know the Test, faid my friend, excepting the joy which we all feel on your recovery, which, as we are unable to deferibe, you will ever be ignorant of.”
I had no words which could exprefswhat I felt upon this occaSion ; fo, having looked at her, I hid my face in the pillow, without Speaking a word. You, my dear Adelaide, are well acquainted with this worthy woman’s name and chara£ter. Since you have frequently heard me exprefs the lively lenfe I still and ever shall, retain of her matei ral care of me. You have alfo often Seen me deplore frer lofs with tears. She died, as you have heard me fay, in my arms, of an inflammation in her bowels. Six months after she bad Saved my life, by her ashduous attendance on me.
As
Mr 8. W I L L I A M S. 229
As Soon as I was able, I dessred I might have thofe letters given to me, which were probably found on the floor, when I fell off my chair, in the fit which had been the caufe of my late indiSpoSi-tion. Madam Bertram Said, “ She deSired to be excufed from giving me that, which had, she apprehended, been the author of my illnefs; and I won’t fays she, give you any of the others, if, up* on looking on the fuperfcriptions, you don’t affure me, that they are not from the fame perfon.” I replied, with a figh, “ Ah ! no, no. Madam, there is no danger of my receiving any more letters from that quarter.” On this assurance she gave them to me. There w’as one from my father, another from Lady	and a third Irom my
inestimable friend, Mr. Smith. I read the two last but the weak state my nerves were then in, made me afraid to open the first. I expelled to find con-folation irom my friend, and Sister; and reproaches mixed with invedlives, from my father.
Mr. Smith beginshis letter, by oblerving, That now, what he had always forefeen would happen, was come to paSs ; my hushand had flung off the malk, and stood confefs’d the villain.” He informs me, “ That Mr. Williams has, by Some well-plsced shruggs, hints, and inuendoes, (without, however, accuSing me of any thing,) given the world caule to think, that he had his rea-fons why he could not live with me any longer, consistently with bis nice Jenfe oj bonourf* The good man goes on, informing me, “ That Mr. Williams wrote a letter to my father, much in the fame stile as his converlation ; in it he recommends me strongly to his care, and begs that he would take me home to his houfe; inSmuaiing, at the fame time, that it would be the only step which could now b^ taken, in order to Save me from inevitable
230 The MEMOIRS of evitable ruin. He then deSires, that my father would meet him, on Such a day, at Such an hour, at his Lawyer’schambers, in the Temple, when he would make a Settlement upon me, which should at least Secure me from want. Your father, (continues Mr. Smith,) went to the rendezvous, according to appointment, when, to his great Surprize, the Lawyer told him, that young Mr. JVil-Hams had Set out for Holland tw'o days before, which w’as the very day on which he wrote your father the letter. Now I beg you, my dear Mz-dam, (fays Mr. 6’OT/Vi?,) to remark the villainy of Such a proceeding, asalfotodraw this confequence from it, w hich is, that you w ill never hear any more from him, nor ever receive a stx-pence of him.” He tells me, “ That, being deSirous to pry a little into my hushand’s condu£I, he had employed Some people of intelligence to watch him ; and that by this means he Soon came to the knowledge, that Mr Williams had brought over with him a French girl, whoSe name was Fatime\ that she had been brought to bed whilst they w’ere in > London^ and were now gone together, child, nurfe, and all, to Holland he adds, that he Saw Mr. Williams	he w as in England, and had even a
long and sharp conversation with him, wherein he pressed him to declare openly, what he had to alledge against me, in justification of his ill treatment of me ; but he could get no other anfwer from him, than that he wished me well, and had too much generosity to oppreSs thofe who were already wretched enough ; tor he Said, he was very much afraid that I should not fuivive his iofs; but that the plain matter of fad was this, that he could no longer, with honor, live under the fame roof with me.*’ My good friend then informs me, “ That he has inclofed an order on a Banker at Marfeilles^
for
M R s. W I L L I A M S.	231
for one hundred pounds sterling, to be paid at fight adding, “ that he destres I would draw upon him for whatever fums I think pioper, as he now claims the promiSe I made him belore I left Englandd^ He then proceeds to congratulate me on having efcaped out of the handsof Such a-mon-ster, as he calls Mr. Williams—My dear Sophie laments the cruelty of my fate, offers me every tonSolarion in her own, and hufband’s power; but adds, “ that Mr. 6’w7;/£'’s zeal and generostty leaves them bankrupts; however, they petition me not totally to neglect them, but give them Some opportunity of rendering me Service.”
I now clearly Saw- the abyfs into which my too great credulity had precipitated me. I revolved, in my distraUed mind, all the arts which had been praftifed, in order to make me contribute to my ov.'n undoing, w hich 1 was very Senfible could never have been effectuated, without my affistance ; I was astonished how I could have been deceived by Such flagrant falShoods, as thofe which had been put in pradice against nje ; I could not account for my imbectllity, in thus luffering myfelf to be played upon ; I was afhamed of having been made the dupe to their Shallow artifices; and to have fallen a martyr to the machinations of two Such worthlefs beings, as my huSband and his girl, funk me, in my own opinion, even almost beneath contempt: 1 now regretted my folly, in having burnt Mr. WHliams'% letter to his father, as well as the other papers, as they would efl'e6lually have convinced his father of my innocence, and his Son’s guilt. In this state of humiliation and Sorrow, I remained for (ome months; grief had, during that time, So totally atforbed all my faculties, that I was become inSenfible to all exterior objefis ; I never pulled off my cloaths, but to change my linen ;
and
232 The MEMOIRSof and when I Slept, it was generally upon the carpet, or in a great chair; life was a burden to me, which I every day wiflied to be releafed from, and which I had a right to think I Should shortly be, as my health declined vifibly every hour.
Mr. IVilliamfs creditors waited upon me in a body, and generoufly assured me, that they would never come upon me for the money; which, by the laws of France, they might have done, as I was liable to have been arrested for my hushand’s debts; and this my Barbarian knew, when he went over to England. I expreSTed my SenSe of their humanity and gopdneSs, in the warmest terms I was miftrefsof. They dessred I would give them a dire’ftion to old Mr. Williams, as one of them intended going over to England, in order to try to get their money ; they begged 1 would make myfelf perfedly eafy about them, nay, they even offered me their Services; my figure, I believe, (which was now much altered by my Sufferings,) contributed to move their compassion, for I perceived tears stand in the eyes of Several of them, whilst they were talking to me. About this time I was routed from my lethargy of woe, by my friend Madame Bertram'^ being taken ill. I instantly flew to her aid, quitted my own houfe, and established myfelf in her room, from whence I never stirred till she died. This stroke, which they who are not thoroughly acquainted with the human heart will naturally Suppofe to have been a coap de grace for me, that is to fay, a finishing stroke to all my mifery, had a quite contrary effedl.
The friendship this valuable woman had for me, her tender compassion of my afflidlions, her attentive care of my health, the fenSibility with which she shared my griefs, and the gentle manner in which she poured the balm of conlolation into my
wounded
Mrs. WILLIAMS.	233
wounded breast, had frequently relieved the afpe-rityof my misfortunes, and kept my heart from breaking : I had leant upon her, and (he had faved me from stnking ; Such was the friend I had just Seen expire in my arms; in that moment, in which I lost her for ever, terror feiy.ed my fc-nfes; 1 looked round, and Saw myfelf alone in the univerfe; I had nothing now to rely upon, no friendly twig to catch hold of to Save myfelf; Frenzy Seemed to advance towards me with hasty strides, accompanied by that fiend, Defpair j I dreaded their approach, and being unable to find any exterior defence against them, I, in this moment of horror, turned my eyes inward, in order to feek. it there ; Fortitude and Resignation appeared at my call; I returned to the bed-fjde of my departed friend, kissed her cheek, and went home, where I instantly undrelT-ed myfelf, and got to bed, and (what may astonish you, perhaps my dear Adelaide) ssept found till the next morning.
You will probably be Surprized that I should have been more affeOed at Madame de Bertram*% death, than I was even at the lofs of my hushand, fortune, fame, &c. To which 1 anfwer, that if I was fo, which I am not Sure of, I can attribute it to nothing but the fame caufe, which made a King oi Lydiuy or feme other country, who was taken prisoner, look with a dry eye on the ignominy, poverty, and ssavery, to which himlelf, wife. Son, and daughter, were reduced ; yet burst into a stood of tears, on feeing an old Servant of his, carrying a weight too heavy for his age and strength. On being afked the reafon of this (as they thought) mif-placed fenSibility, he anfwered, “ 'I'hal the misfortunes into which he law himfelf and family plunged, had filled the cup of his calamities, and that the event, which had just happened, had made it run over.”	But
234 The M.DM O SR S of But to my story : As Soon as I roSe In the morn--ing, I began to fix upon the only plan on which I' could hope to find peace, which was this, that,. Since I could not alter the nature of my misfortunes, 1 would try to change my ideas of them;
1 therefore refolved to follow \ Bcjingbroke's System, who lays, “ DiiSipation of mind,, and a length of time, are the remedies to which the greatest part of mankind trust in their affluftions ; but tlie first of thefe works a temporary, the Second, a stow effe<£t, and both are unworthy of a wife man. Are we to fly from ourfelves, that we may fly from our misfortunes; -and fondly imagine that the dif-eafe is cured, becaufe we find means to get Some minutes refpite from pain? Or, fhall we expefit from Time, the phyiician of brutes, a lingering and uncertain deliverance? Shall we wait to be happy, till we can forget that we are miferable? and owe to the weaknefs of our faculties, a tranquility which ought to be the effeSl of their strength ? Far otherwife ; let us fet all our past and prefent afflictions at once before our eyes; let us refolve to overcome them, instead of flying from them, or wearing out the fenfe of them by a long and igno/Tiinious patience ; instead of palliating remedies, let us ufe the incifion knife and the caustic, fearch the wound to the bottom, and work an immediate and radical cure.”
My mistorrunes, and the fenfe I had of them, were equally great ; I u as not iiardened, either by their number, or the frequency ot their attacks, but, on the coniraiy, 1 gati.ered strength from my own weaknefs; for, as a wretch who is drowning, from mstindf, will catch at any twig he fees, in hopes of Saving himfeii, though, perhaps, in his cooler me ratnis of reafon, he did not estimate the
value
Mrs. Win L I A M S.	235
Value ol his life at a farthing; fo I, when I faw MadneSs attempt ng to feir.e my brain, (from the lame inssinft which impells us all to the preservation of ourftlves,) caught hold of Philofophy to Save me from the horrors of Dillradion Ihe did fo, Ihe taught me to fubdue my own will, and to estimate things at iht ii oroper value ; by doing the first, I perceived that I had no right to complain of my fate. Since, however Severe I might look upon it to be, yet history furnifhesus with many examples, of the worthiest characters being oppreffed by misfortunes, to a degree beyond any I had yet experienced: I reflected, that I had brought all my Sorrows upon myfelf, by my difobedience to my parents, as well as from a confidence in my own judgment, which I ought to have known* (becaufe I had frequently been told fo,) was the worst of guides at the age of fifteen, I now looked upon my misfortunes as the natural confequen-ces of my mdifcretion, and, as fuch, received them with fubmistion. I ventured to alk myfelf, what right I had to be happy, when I could not, from the most partial examination of myfelf, find I had any ? I then confidered what happinefs was; when, after the most metaphyfical dilTeCtion of it, I agreed with Mr. Fope, “ That it confisted in Health, Peace, and Competence,” and thefe were in my power; fince, in all probability, Health would be the concomitant of Peace ; and the mere necessaries of life (which I apprehend to be Competence) I had very little reafon to think I fhould ever know the want of; Peace I hoped to be able to acquire, by a constant adherence to Virtue, and a thorough fubmistion to the Difpenfations ot Providence.
I was not to learn, that to be a Philofopher in theory only, was as eafy, as the being fo, in practice.
/
236 T H E M E M O r R S o F tice, was difficult; but I thought it a noble purfuit, and I therefore determined to ufe every poffibie means of attaining it. I had, as you may have obferved in the courfe of this narrative, Adelaide^ frequently refolved to adl upon pretty near the fame plan as this I am now (peaking of, but Some intervening accident had always happened to overturn my System : I now Set out under more favourable auSpices j I was no longer a child, and I had gained experience from my former errors; yet I must confeSs, that, notwithstanding theSe circumstances in my favour, I found, that I had undertaken an arduous talk, as well as one, which required a length of time to accomplish : Nature, or the Passions, (which you will,) frequently undid, in one moment, the labour of months : However, I did not Suffer mySelf to be diScouraged by the opposition I met w’ith from them, but repaired, with diligence, the breaches they had made: My industry and perSeverance have been crowned with fucceSs; for though I still (at the moment I am now writing) preServe a tender remembrance of my hushand, yet it is, and has long been. So unaccompanied either by reSentment or grief; a pleaSing melancholy will Sometimes steal on me, when I recolle£t past feenes ; but my passions are, I hope. Silenced for ever. It was wifely Said of the Emperor Afarrw/or whoever Said it, (though 1 think it was him,) That, certainly, there is no other account to be made of this ridiculous world, than to reSolve, that the change of fortune, onlht great theatre, is but as the change of gar-' ments on lefs \ for, Seeing death, in the end of the play, takes from a/J, whatsoever fortune or force take from anyone, it were a foolish madnefs, in the shipwreck of wordly things, where all Sinks but farrow, to Save	Pardon
Mrs. WILLIAMS.	237
Pardon this digrefllon, Adelaide^ I could not help it, but will now hasten to put an end to my story, which, if it tires you But half as much in the reading, as it did me in the writing of it, I most hear-tily pity you.
I had now lost the only friend 1 had in France, for which reafon I determined to return to my native country ; and immediately wrote to my Sister, and Vic. Smith, in order to inform them of this my intention. In their anfwers, I was infinitely fur-prized to find them averfe to my projedl. They counfel me not to think of coming to England So Soon ; assuring me, that the abule and perfecution of all forts, which I stiould meet with, from the family of my hufband, would be very difagreeable tome; they therefore give it as their opinion, that it wiUhe much more eligible for me to stay \w France .Some time longer, at least till Mr. Williams's infamous conduct was more generally known in his own country, or till his future behaviour had lost him totally in the eyes of the world ; which, they Said, could not fail of being the cafe, in a Ihort time, at the rate he was going on.
I believe 1 have not told you, my Dear, that, Since I was abroad, I had frequently received many very kind and friendly ietters from my uncle Bold-by, and he generousty inSisted on joining, w:ith Mr. Smith, in Securing me from want, by fettling, between them a penSion upon me, during my huf-band’s life, or for as long as I stiould receive nothing from him. Sophie laments that She is with child, otherwise, stie fays, that She, and Sir Charles, intended themfelves the pleafure of Spending Some time with mein trance-, but (he gives me her word, that, as Soon as she is able, she will fly to me, I had wrote frequently to Mr. Williams,
fince
238 The M E M OIRS OF
Since he left me; Sometimes begging him to re- -
lieve my necessities, by fending me Some money ;
and, at other times, deSiring he would let me know
how he did ? To all which, I never recived any
anfwer.
As Soon as my mind was a little calmed, after the death of my ever-valued friend Madame Ber-traviy I determined to leave Marfeilles ; and, had I followed the dilates of my own inclination, I should now have shut myfelf up in a convent; but the Solemn promife I had made Mr. Smithy never to enter one, during my hushand’s life, rendered it imposhble ; However, as my heart Sighed for retirement, I took a little cottage, by the means of an acquaintance of mine, who was going thither, in the environs of Avignon, not far off the famous river Vaucleufe, So celebrated by the immortal Petrarch. 'I’here, with my books, and one or two agreeable neighbours, I passed my time, if not in gaiety, at least in peace. It was here that I employed the greatest part of my leifure in the study of my own heart: I found it, on examination, to be fo very defective, that I was almost difeouraged from the attempt, to regulate its feelings by the Laws of Philofophy. I found that it always rebelled • against realbn, every time that my hushand prefent-ed himfelf to my imagination ; nay, it obstinately perSisted in loving him. Such is the invincible tyranny of a first impression, on a youthful and a virtuous mind, that I don't believe it can ever he totally eradicated, either by time, or ill treatment;
I mean in our lex: Don’t mifunderfhand me lo much, my dea Adelaide, as to fuppole that I ac-cufe the men of being capable of fo much weak-nefs; their whole fex give evident proofs of the contrary daily. In order to divest my heart, as
much
Mrs. williams.	239
much as poSTible, of the tendernefs it Aill retained for Mr. tVilliamt:^ I endeavoured to strengthen my reafon, by continually representing to myfelf, ’the unfeeling manner in which he had betrayed and abandoned me; to which'! added, a nicefurvey of his hypocrify, licentiouSneSs, difhonesty, and cruelty : All theSe circumstances did not fail of convincing mymnderstanding, that I ought both to hate, and deSpiSe him; but my weak heart, even in the moment of this cor.vi6tion, sighed, and acknowledged its Sovereign—“ O !det not thy heart deSpiSe me; thou, who experience has not taught, that it is miSery to loSethat, which it is not happi-neSs to poSTeSs.”
I had now pasted turn years in this enchanting retreat, and was grown much the wifer for conversing lo frequently with mySelf, I’ll asture you. When the CounteSs of Vitri came to Avignon, in her w'ay to Paris, She knew that I was in that neighbourhood, and istantly came to fee me; She and I had been intimately acquainted, both at Paris and Lyons, She met me with the liveliest demonstrations of joy at Seeing, and Sorrow at finding me So much altered ; stie prested me, with ardour, to accompany her to Avignon, alledging, that She Should stay there but a few days, and ste inSist-ed on my Spending that Short time with her. 1 pleaded my want of health and Sftirits; she vowed ' she would take no denial ; So, with a kind of gentle violence, she put me into her coach, ordering my maid to pack up what was necessary, and to follow me. The next day, the CounteSs diSplayed all the powers of rhetoric, in order to convince me, that I was acTing on a wrong plan: She aS-ferted, “ That whilst I vainly imagined, that I was conquering my misfortunes, by dint of reflection.
240 The MEMOIRS OP flection, and reafon, I was, in fa£t, destroying my constitution, by foothinggrief; which would, she averred, foon grow habitual to me, and by that means effectually incapacitate me for any future enjoyment in life: And (fays she, in her Sprightly manner, which you know,) you will, my Dear, very shortly, be metamorphofed into a vegetable.** I fmiled at her idea, and replied, That a state of vegetation was a state of negative happinefs, and I feared that was all we had a right to hope for in this wretched world.” “ Indeed, my dear Mrs. Williams^ (Said the Countefs,) a dofe of diffipati-on, and change of Scene, will do you more good, in one w'eek, than all your old musty PhiloSophers have done in years: You must conSider, child, (Says she,) that the body and foul are strangely con-ne^ed together, and that when one is invigorated and languid, the other participates of its weakneSs : Restore your body to health, therefore, by exer-cife and change of place, and I will anfwer for the recovery of your mind.** I fmiled at her having thus reverfed my System, and she went on : Come, (fays she,) I am going to Parlsy for a week, or ten days, and from thence I shall go to Sfa ; you have nothing to do here, my dear Mrs. Williams, So let me prevail on you to go along with me ; I will bring you back to Avignon, if you deSire it, or fix you in any other Spot you shall choofe to refide in. At my return from Germany, 1 intended to have stayed here but two or three days; but if you will confent to accompany me on my purpofed tour, I will wait your time, only make what haste you can, becaufe the Count DeFitri waits for me at Paris, and will be impatient till I arrive there.”
You know, Adelaide, how amiable, how Seducing the Countefs is j she therefore pievailed. I
could
I
Mrs. WTLI.IAMS.	241
could not reSist the vivacity of her Solicitations; the reafons, however, which made mo the more readily confent to accompany her into Germany^ were diametrically oppoSite to thofe She had ufed, in order to engage me to comply with her request ; for it was, becaufc I had in a great nieafure, got the better of my affliflions, that I acquiefeed with her propofal of quitting my little retreat, and entering again into the world ; and not with the falfe hope, that dilSipation, and change of place, could any way have contributed to the removing of evils, of the nature thofe were which I Irad had to struggle with ; but as my perfon had greatly fulSered, from the perturbation of my mind, and that my fpirits were lefs volatile than they had formerly been, the Countefs took it for granted, that I was killing my-felf, by indulging melancholy ; however, I conii-dered, that change of air, and exercife, were two excellent ingredients towards the procuring of health which I wanted : I therefore the more readily Set about packing up my things, and arranging my affairs, which being done in about a month after the Counter’s arrival at Avignon, we Set out, She and I, and our two women, in her berlin and Six. We met the Count De Vitri at Paris ; lie Scolded me. agreeably, for detaining his Lady fo long at Avignon. 1 defending mycaufe as well as I could. We stayed at Paris three months, instead of a week or ten days, as the Countefs had told me She intended to do, and then Set out for Spa.
It was during our reSidence at Paris, that I first beheld my Adelaide ; we met at Lady S—’s; and you may remember, how, by the force of Sympathy, we feledled one another from a numerouscom-pany, and joined conversation during the whole evening. From that period, I Saw you every day, and almost all the day, whilst I remained at Paris
VoL. II	G	and
242	The M E M O I R S of
asd, when obliged to leave it, I quitted you with the most pungent regret, tl need not here inform you, how I Spent my time at Spa, Since I constantly corresponded with you from that place. A few days before the time fixed for the Count and Coun-tefs De VltrV% return \o Paris, I received a letter from my I./ady Stanly, wherein she tells me, that
Sir Charles and herfelf will come to ------, if i
will confent to meet them there : You may eafi-iy fuppofe, how readily I contented to this proposal ; and the next post brought me a letter from Sir Charles, in which was inclofed one of recommendation to Madame de Lape, who, he tells me, is an intimate acquaintance of his, and to whofe houfc he, and his Lady, were going upon a vifit. My fellow-travellers, and I, parted at Aix-la-Chapelle, not without concern on both Sides, I promited the Countefs, and her worthy hushand, to rejoin them at Paris, as Soon as my brother and Sister should
return to England. I then proceeded on to------,
where I met with the most gracious reception, from Madame de Lape. She would not Suffer me to lodge any where but in her houfe. The next day broughTSir Charles, and his Lady, to us. I shall draw a veil over the Icene ot our meeting ; it was too tender to beoxpreffed ; but you have a heart which will eafily paint it. Such as it was, to
your imagination. We stayed at-------, and other '
parts of Flanders, for upwards of fix months, when Sir Charles Said, his wife and he would accompany me to Paris ; first, becaule they should, by that means. Spend more time with me ; and, next, that Sophie might fee the place : There, my Dear, you j know they stayed with me fix montfis ; you was prefent at our parties; I then went home v/ith you ; and we have never been one day Separate, from that time, till my coming into England.
Now
Mrs. W I L L I A M S. 243 ' Now you have before you all the events of my Tife, except that of the death of my hulhand, tlie news of which I received whilst I was in Flanders. He died in Italyy Surrounded with bastards by different women, and, at that lime, was accompanied by a girl, which he had picked up iomewliere in his travels, who had, from the time lie left me, been preceded, in his affeclion', by numbers like herfelf, of all nations. I was informed, by a Gentleman who was upon the Spot when he died, that he was plundered, and, being a Heretic, they flunp him into a ditch near the town, in a common deal box, without any other ceremony. I wept his fate bitterly, Adelaidoy nay, I forgot all his faults, in consideration of the dreadful Situationin which he must have died, torn by remorfe, and unattended, unwept, by any preSent friend ! Oh, Adelaide ! why was I not there then, to have ad-mimstred confolation to his astlidted foul ? I stiould, by my tender care of him, have fmoothed the bed of steknefs ; but was not to be. “ O ! thou eter-nal Arbiter of Things, be thy great Bidding ‘‘ done ! for who am I, to question thy appoint-“ ment*.!”
The death of iny uncle Eoldby, who had fur-■vived my aunt, and had gefierousty left me a large Sum of money, produced a law Suit, as Some of his relationsendeavoured to fetaSide the will, in order as I fuppoie, to deprive me of fo considerable a legacy; which was very abfurd in them, as Sir Charles Stanly was certainly his heir at law, and he never wifhed (as you may fuppofe) to injure me. It was, however, thought proper, by him and the Lawyers, that I Should appear, and make my claim, in perfon; in order to which, you know, I came
* AkenfitJe’s Pleafures of the Imagination.
244	letter X.
back to my native country, which I had not Seen
for many years.
And now, my Dear, I have fulfilled my pro-mife ; and have nothing left, but to hope that you will continue to love me, after having thus cxpoSed to you all the weaknsffes of my heart and all the errors in my condudf.
LETTER X.
To Mrs. Williams. ever dear Charlotte,
HO W have you restored trancjulllity to my breast, and health to my Brother, by your last kind letters! How nobly Sincere, and generous, is that to him! How like yourfelf ! He kifTed the lines which were traced by your fair hand, a thousand times, and then laid, with a faint voice, “ Let me obey her ; give me my medicines.” I had already engaged him to conform (in Some mcafure at least) to the orders of his Phyficians, by telling him, “ That I was certain you would write to him, by the next post, and that for this reafon he ought to try to live, in order to have the Satisfaction of reading your letter.” His fever -was abated for Some days, but still it hangs upon him without intermitting: The Dofilor, faysit is on his nerves, and Spirits. We yesterday received the packet, with your Memoirs in it, by the messenger. My Brother, as foon as I told him its contents, inSisted upon my reading it to him. I did So for above an hour, last night but finding that it agitated him too much, 1 pretended sseepinefs, andlelthii room, but not to go to bed : No, my dtda Charlotte, I fat up all
night
LETTER XT.	245
night reading the history of your life. What stiali I fay to you, my admirable friend ? In what words shall I thank you, for the confidence you have placed in me ? I'he gift is jnestimable, and I have no expreffion which will be any way adequate to my fenfibility of the obligation My heart has been torn to pieces alternately, by pity of your misfortunes,, veneration of your virtue, and astonishment at your fortitude : You have, indeed, reafon, my amiable friend, to dread a Second attachment ; but there never. Sure, was a monster in the world like Mr. Williams. How cruel, then, it was, that he should fall to your lot ! My Brother calls for me to read to him. Adieu. Your’s in haste, but always with the tenderest afFe6Iion, and friendship,	D’Angf,ville.
P. S. How could you fo peremptorily forbid the Marquis anfwering your Letter ? Take care of yourfelf, for, ill as he is, he has laid a Scheme to be revenged of you.
LET T E R XT.
Lo Mademoifdle D’An geville.
I Rejoice, my dear Adelaide^ to hear that he Marquis is better ; but how I tremble for the conlequenccs ot a letter, wrote under the impulfe of terror, and compafuon. Does your Brother know me, well enough, to be certain, that I have none of thofe little arts, attributed to our fex, on' Similar occaSiouvS ? May he not fuppofe, that, thro* a fenfe of modesty, I have concealed a part of my Sentiments from him ; if fo, into what a labyrinth will that error lead him. Try, then, to convince G 3	him,
\
24-6	L E T TER XT.
him, my dear gii!, that I rather heightened the colouring, in deScribing the nature ot my attachment to him, than Softened it, not to Suffer hiff hopes to be too Sanguine. I dread the efSecis of a disappointment, to a mind So Sufceptible as his is. Read my heart, my Dear, in your own ; remember, that having been attached to a man of merit, when you was extremely young, aad he dying almost: on the day destined for your nuptials, you have ever Since been deaf to all Sollicitations, and intreaties, on the fubjedl of matrimony, and constantly declared yourSelf vowed to celibacy. How often have you told me, that love, like death, strikes but once ; and all elfe (Said you) was vice, and for that reafon, your heart was incapable of receiving a Second imprestion. Why cannot you fuppofe mine to be made of the fame metal, and my ideas to be the fame ? I think, nay, i believe them to be So. For what, then, can the Marquis hope ? But let me drop the Subjed; it pains me, and can give you nopleafure.
I arrived here, a week ago, that is,, at Sir Char-les Stanly's; and found hinj, and my filler, delighted on Seeing me, after So long an abSence. We gazed reciprocally on each other, with ineffable pleafure. The happinefs they enjoy in one another, furnishes me with a continual Source of Satisfaction. Happy, happy, Sophie ! whofe very palTions contribute to her telicity. Such are the effedis of a well directed cl.oice in a partner tor life. How was my heart termed for the enjoyment of Such a virtuous union ! And how has inexorable fate denied it to my wistes. But, alas! I torieited all right lo happinefs, when I forgot my duty to the authors ot my being.
I found
letter XI. 247
I found this h.ippy pair, Surrounded by a little family, of two boys, and two girls, i caught theSe pretty children in’my arms,-by turns, and pressed them to my bofom. T felt that I loved them, with a maternal afSedlion ; they called to my remembrance, my poor little George, and the Silent tear stoic dow'n my chtek.
I had yesserday a letter from my father, in which he gives me a very pressing invitation, to come and Spend Some time with him. This is the ssrll notice he has ever taken of me, ssnce the abuSive, cruel letter, he wrote to me at Marjeilles, upon my hushand’s having left me. But I am now rich, and, as it is not very probable that I Ihould ever marry again, perhaps he thinks my friendihip may be worth cultivating; however this maybe, Jshall not pry into the motive, fo have anfwered his letter in the civilest terms, promiSing to comply with
his obliging recjuest of feeing me at.- In his
letter, my mother, and Some brothers, and fisters, which' I have no recolle<51ion of fend their love. How true it is, that poverty is a great difgrace, and that there is no pity for the unlucky: The Unfortunate, like the Abfent, are always in the wrong.
I must tell you, Adelaide, that the master and miftrefs of this hoiife, have almost brought me to forgive Cecrops; who, they tell us, was the first institutor of matrimony. I think, if you was here, and Saw my brother Charles, that you would be tempted to break your vow in his favour. It I am not partial^ as a Sister, he is one of the most amiable young men, both in figure, and charaiSlcr, that ever I faw. Your picture, which is in my bracelet, he is become fo enamoured with, that he iwears he wall return with me to France, in order G 4	to
248	LETTER XI.
to behold the bright original. He has already alk-ed my leave, twenty times to carry a letire de cachets as he calls it bom me to fetch you over; upon which I am obliged to assure him, that he would never be able to bring you over alive. Such are the terrors you have of the fea ; otherwife, I tell him, you would never have lussered me to come over from France
I must inform you, that J find they have laid deep ichemes for keeping me here ; but they will not do ; for I am refolved to return to you, my dear Adelaide^ and to end my days in a country which I love above all others, where I hope to die in your arms, my friend, as you are a few years younger than I am. Charles tells me that he was acquainted with the MarquisD’y^^, when he was at Paris, Some years ago. My never having mentioned the name of my family, either to you, or your brother, is the reafon I fuppofe, why I was ignorant of this circumstance. Charles begs his reipettful compliments to that Gentleman ; give my love to him, and tell him, that I expe6l to hear that he has obeyed my commands, and consequently, that he is perle£sty restored to health and ipirits. My Brother, and I, go to my father’s to-morrow, where I purpofe fpending a week or ten days when 1 ihall return here again. This vifit, my Dear, • fits heavy on my heart ; it will recall fo many cruel ideas to my memory, that I almost wisti I might be excufed going there. How did I once doat upon my father ! Nay, liow I love him still ! But then it will be impossible for me, ever to convince his mifantrophy, that one can love and yet difobey; befide, I cannot bear the theme; it is Such a disagreeable recapitulation of all my afflictions; futh a humiliating fubjetSt. No, no, let
him
LETTER XII.	249
him think of me as he pleafes; I will however, if attacked, defend myfelf with no other arms, than that of pleading my Sorrows, winch have I apprehend, been Sufficiently Severe to expiate my cri me. Adieu, my dear friend, I tire you, and mystlf, with Such long letters. It is to make amends for my not writing oftner ; but, indeed, Adelaide, I have not time. God blefs you, prays your ever faithful,
C. Williams.
LETTER XII.
To Mrs. Williams.
Indeed, my dear Charlotte, I tremble at feeing you thus Surrounded hy your friends zv\d my enemies. I dread the influence they must naturally have over you So much, that if I was unacquainted with the steadinefs of your character, and the inviolable adherence you have to your word, I Should defpair of ever having the happinefs of feeing you in France again ; but I fortify my Spirits, from the assurances you repeatedly give me, in your letters, of the contrary.
My Brother mends every day. We are in the country, at a little village Paris, for his health. He walks, rides, reads your Memoirs, and then talks of you the rest of the day. So we Spend our time, for I am his Shadow.
I must tell you, my Dear, that he isnowaydif-couraged, from the picture you have drawn of your own heart, or of its Sufferings: He fays you was formed for Love; that your heart is timid, but far from being obdurate; nay, he has the assurance G 5	to
C50	L E T T E R XII. .
to aver, that you can never be truly happy, till you are united to a man, who, knowing your worth, can love you with as ardent, and as refined a paifion, as he does. He frequently laments, that his having been AmbalSador to Spain, fhould hav© deprived him of So many years pleaSure, which he fhould otherwise have enjoyed in your company. Whilst you, Adelaide, Says he, was indulging in that felicity, which your frequent letters were full of the liveliest defcription of; you praifed your friend fo warmly, and painted her So amiable, that I w'as half enamoured with her idea, before I Saw her; it was not, therefore. Surprizing, that I fhould loSe my liberty very Soon aster my arrival at home. But, to my unSpeakable difSappoiniment, I Souird nothing in your friend which could give the least encouragement to my hopes: on the contrary, an air of melancholy, which constanily overSpread her. fine features, and a fort of steady philoSophy, which I found to be the character of her miml, made me endeavoun to conquer, whatl feared won d be a hopeleSs pastion. I enjoyed the charms of her Society, however. The eaSy, open friendship stie honoured me with, as being your brother, was So flattering to my heart,, that 1 dreaded lofing it, by declaring my fcritimcnts to be of a tenderer nature, than thofe of Simple friendihip. I hoped ti.me, and Some lucky incident, might prove pro-^ pitious to my defircs, when bufineis called her to England, and Ihewed me how impostible it v\as to live without her.
Thnsyou See, Charlotte, that it is Le tort de man fang, de fenjiamer pour vans. Since my Brother, as well as myfelf, was caught at first fight.
I thank you, my Dear, for offering me your Brother. 1 am perfuaded that he is very amiable ; But you will agree with me, that one cannot be in
love
LETTER XII.	251
love with two people at once ; and I am still too much So with my deceaSed friend, ever to have a heart to difpofe of to another. Your cafe, and m\x)t Charlottef will admit of no comparifon ; they are totally different; the obje6tof your paffion was very unworthy of being fo ; you cannot esteem his memory, nor, with reafon, lament his lofs. 1 can,
I must do both, for my departed Lover. I Swore, on his dying lips, that I would never be another’s ; and Providence, approving the vow, has steeled my heart against his whole Sex. I have a kind of romantic connexion with the Spirit of my dead friend, which keeps him ever preSent to my imagination. Don’t laugh at me, when I tell you, that I fancy mySelf married to him, and that he is ab-Sent on a journey ; I therefore give him an account of all my aSlions; I conSult his opinion in every tranSa6tiorr of my life, by aSking mySelf how' be would wiSh me to a£t in Such a caSe TheSe chi-mscra’s, (tor Such I allow them to be,) fill my heart, and make me Support life with chearfulneSs,
“ Till pitying Nature Signs the last releafe,
“ And bids afllifted worth retire to peace.”
And then, I lake it for granted, that my Heaven will be the rejoining him. This is a fine System of MelaphySics, you’U Say ! you, who are So deeply read in them. No matter, it is more conSoiatory than many of their hypotheSes; and, for any thing that either you, or I, know to the contrary, may be just as true.
My Brother, who, you know, is an excellent Roman Catholic, Seeing a croud about a little cottage in the village this morning, enquired what was the cauSe of it ? when one of the peaSants told him, that a poor old Soldier was dying in that houfe, and that the Priest had just carried the Sacrament to him. Compaffion made the Marquis go and
viSit
252	I. E T T E R XII.
viSit one of his fellow Soldiers in distreis ; when, on entering the room, he perceived a fat Capuchkn Friar fitting by the bed-Iide of the Sick man, and holding to him a Crucifix, endeavouring, at the fame time, to put it into his hand, faying, “ Friend, fpe.ak to your Lord, and Redeemer !” The poor fellow made no anSwer. The Friar again exhorting him to fay fometliing to his Saviour ! At last, the dying man raifed his eyes, and, looking on the Crucifix for Some moments, exclaimed, in a faint Voice, Ah! man Dieu, que vous etes maigre *! This ridiculous	of tlie old Soldier made tlie
Marquis and me laugh heartily. You must remember, Cbarlottey that Chrijl is always figutred on the Crofs as being So thin, that Iris bones appear almost to pierce through the Skin. This story must appear pleafant to you Englifo, who are all profelS-ed IconoclaJJes, Since it did fo to me, who am, as you fay, a Worlhiper of Idols.
What a prating humour I am in. For God^s fake, Charhtte, return loon. The length of your abfence grows infupportable to me. Let me know exaflly when you purpofe being at Calais^ that I may meet you at least as far as St. Denis. Adieu ! Love me as well as you can, and that will never be half as well as 1 do you.	D’Anglville.
P. S. Give my best compliments to Sir Charles Stanly and hiS Lady. 1 am in love with the former. Ah ! my Dear, what a difference between him and Mr. Williams I How capricious is Love ! 1 beg to be mentioned to Mr. Smith, as an admirer ol his virtues : But I won’t talk to you of your Memoirs, till v.'e
* Oh, my God, hov.' thin you are !
meet
LETTER XIII.	253
meet: They have been the delight, and Sorrow, of my life, whilst I was reading them. My Brother has, no doubt, by this time, got them by heart, as he reads them all day long; . nay, they steep with hin), too. He fays a thoufand things at this moment, which I lhall, not tell you ; not becaufe they are unworthy of you, but becaufe I am not obliged to make Love tor him. Adieu.
LETT E R XIII.
Fo Mademoifelk D ’ A N G E v 1 i L r.
THanks, my amiable Girl, for your long letter. It was a great confolation to me at my father’s, from whence I returned yesterday. I was received there, with an attentton, and an air of diftin61ion, which obliged me to fupprefs all demonstrations of that filial tendernefs, which glowed in my heart on the fight of my parents. I longed to strain them to my breast, and to bathe them in tears ot dutiful atfe£fion : But the very w'ell-bread manner in which they accosted me, forced me to endeavour to conceal my feelings, in order ' to accommodate my behaviour to theirs. They faid every thing that was civil on my arrival; told me how impossible it was for them to exprefs the joy they felt on feeing me. (\ do most Sincerely believe that they Spoke truth.) 'fhey then presented to me fomelweet children, whom theytoKl me were my brothers, and Sisters. I kissed them v/ith uncommon marks of fondnefs, and fenflbiliiy ; becaufe the tendernefs with which my heart was overcharged, being flung out of its direction, fell
naturally
254	LETTER XIII.
naturally upon them. During my stay at my father’s, his conversation was So infinitely amuSmg, as well as improving, that I listened to him with delight, for whole days together; and when, by accident, he touched upon the topic of my dilobe-dience, it was with a gentlenefs, and delicacy, which endeared him to my heart; notwithstanding it. taught me, (what I had ever apprehended,),that no time could obliterate it from my memory.
He told me, that old Mr. JVilliarns had, upon the news of his Son’s deceafe. Seized upon all his effefts in England^ in order, as he Said, to pay himfelf, as far as it would go, the money which he had lent my hulhand upon a bond. On hearing this, faid my father, I waited upon iv^m, and reprefented, in the strongest manner 1 could, the injustice of Such a proceeding. I told him, that I thought he ought, in honor, to make fome provision for you. Child. To which he replied, that the Law could not oblige him to do it ; and that he was very certain his inclination would never lead him to fupport a woman, for whom he had neither esteem, nor friendship, and indeed distiked extremely, for very obvious and good reafons.
I anfwered my father, that the old Gentleman,
I imagined, thought he had reafon to have theaver*-Sion for me which he had exprefifed ; ami that, on my part, I should now take no pains to undeceive him.
My mother was very good natured, and cheerful. She and my father both pressed me much to lay aside my intention of returning to France^ and to reside, for the future, in my native Land. But \ I told them, that my refolution was fixed on that head. I obferved, that France had afforded me an afylum, when England refuled it me ; adding, that
I had
LETTER Xlir.	255
I had found boih friends, and confolation there, when my relations even difowned me here. I Said, thefe circtimflances were strongly imprest on my memory, and had, in Some meafure, made me dif-like my own country. Here my father (hook his head, and replied, Lam of opinion, hlxs. Williams^ that you conceal from us the real reafon of your attachment iox France: However, continued he. Smiling, if you do marry again, you will probably be much happier in your (econd, than you was in your first choice ; for I have made it an obServatir on, that a violent palSion never brought two people together, but ii made oae of them miferable. You, Madam, have e-:?perienccd the truth of this observation ; and adverfity has taught you, I dare Say, the art of regulating your paifions; if, indeed. Said he, interrupting himleli, you have any left to regulate ; for I obferve, w ith pain, that the length, and violence of your afflidlions have timsiured your difpofition with a Soft meianoholy, which never Sails to enevervate the mind, and, if not Soon removed, will infallibly degenerate into apathy. 1 afTur-ed my father, laughing, that I w'as not quite So much the vegetable as he Seemed to fuppofe me to be : He replied, in the Same tone, that he was very glad to bear it. In (hort, Adelaide, had I Sound that warmth of affedtion in my father towards me, which I felt So powerfully in my bofom for him, he would never have fufpefled me of want of feeling ; and I Should have past my time delicioussy here j but that want hasimbittered the Scene, and my heart Sighed involuntarily every time I looked at him. We parted, as,we had met; he Said every thing that was kind ; I felt too much, to fiiy any thing. My mother Ihed a tear, as fhe bid me adieu ; begging me, however, to fay a thoufand
tender
256	LETTER Xlir.
tender things for her to her daughter	whofe
prefent, happinels, I could perceive to be the Source of my mother’s blifs. Ah ! Adelaide, was it then wrote on the adamantine tablets of Providence, that I Should never meet with a return of affedli-on, but from thofe of my own Sex ?
I arrived here last night. We propofe Setting out from hence for London in a day or two. Our party conSists of Sir Charles, his Lady, and little family ; Mr. Charles Rutland, alias my Brother, and myfelf. I do not intend to stay more than a week in town ; it will require that time, at least, to pack up, and regulate my affairs, as I ihall, probably, now take a final leave of	Charles
has got his father’s leave to accompany me to Paris-, and Sir	and my Sister, promife, that
they will come and make us a viSit there next Spring. I will let you know exa6ily the day fixed for my departure, when 1 know it mySelf. How can you mention Denis? Indeed 1 expe£l you meet me half way from Paris to Calais, at will least ; if not, I Shall die on the road of impatience to fee you. Adieu. Goribiefs you.
C. Williams.
Remember me to the Marquis. All here Say a million of civil things to you, which I have not time to write. Mr.	esteems him-
felf much honored by your compliment to him. I Shall not write to you, till the day before I Set off.
L E T*.
LETT E R XIV. 257
To Madetnoifelle D ’ A N G E V l L 1. E.
Good GocM Adelaide, how Sliall I expreSs to you, the furprize which an event, the tnost unlooked for hy me, thougli premeditated, you threw me into It happened thus: YeSterday in the evening, as try Sister, family, and Self, were Sitting in the parlour together, my footman, (the French one,) opened the door, laying to me, “ Madam, there is a Gentleman deSires to Speak with you.” With me, I anfwered : Who is he ?” “ I have forgot his name, (replied the fellow, archly,) but I have feen him with you. Madam, I think in Parisd^ “ Shew the Gentleman in here,” fays my Sister. “ Madam, (anfwered my Servant,) he don’t chooSe to walk in, but deSires to Speak to my mistrefs alone.” “ Well, (Says I,) if that is the cafe, I don’t know who he can be ; how'ever, ' ssiew him into the back parlour, and Say I am coming.” I followed my Servant, revolving in my mind who this could be that I had known at Paris, when, on entering the room where the stranger was, before I could have had lime to Survey his figure, I found the Marquis De.^//e at my feet. I fcrtamed out with Surprize. Your Brother had tfie imprudence to hold me in his arms for a minute at least, beiore I had recolIe£lion enough to diSen-gage mySelf from him. My Servant, on heating me Shriek out, had brought my Sister to my astist-ance, who found us in the prettiest Situation imaginable, the Marquis still holding one of my hands, and, I believe, kisting it. He now Seated me in a chair, and then began making a great many handfome apologies for having alarmed us fo much, by the Suddennefs, as well as unexpedled-
neSs/
258	LET -T E R XIV.
nefs, of his appearance; all this was Greek to So-pbie, who stood staring at us, till I prefented the Marq uis to her, Saying, he was the Brollierof my friend. Charles came into the room at this moment, and flew into the Marquis’s arms; who recollected him instantly. Sir Cbarlei received his guest with the most cordial afPedion ; my Sister express the most immoderate joy ; and, h>r my part, after my fright was over, I was-not Sorry to fee him ; in Short my Dear, he has established him-felf fo well in this houfe, that I do not really believe, that it would be in my power to turn him out of it, even if I hada m»nd to do it; and the worst part of the story is, that he knows this very well, I assure you. Now you know, he must fee every thing that is to be Seen in London^ which will take up Some time, and consequently detain me much longer here than I intended staying, What do you fay to that, Adelaide? But you deferv-e to be punifhed, for having kept the Secret fo well. The whole houfe here rejoice at your Brother’s arrival, becaufe they foreSee that it will be a means of keeping me for’ feme time in England. I fee plainly now. Madam, how far I may rely upon your friendship ; when this brother of yours is put into competition with me, my Scale, I fancy, would prove very light. I have half a mind to be angry with you, Ade!atde\ think only what I Should have done, if my Brother had not confented to accompany me to Paris.? Did you intend that the Marquis, and I, Should have travslled, tdte a tete, together? How has your love of him blinded your friendship for me ! But I wonh write any more, tor fear I Should icold;, let me, however, tell you, that he is very well, and looks So ; and that I am, in Spite of your ill-treatment of me, yours affedionately,
C. Williams.
^	L f: T T E R XV.	25.5
f Ihall now write to you no more. I reSign my pen to the Marquis, who has promifed to continue the correspondence.
LETTER XV.
To Mrs. W I L L I A M s.
So, you are really angry with me, Charlotte^ becaufe I did not tell you of my Brother’s intention of fetching you from England^ in order that you might, with a toneof authority, have forbid his coming, on pain of incurring your difplea-fure. No, no, my Dear, we both knew you too well for that ; beSides, did I not tell you that he meditated revenge, ever Since you laid your commands upon him not to write to you ? I am Sorry, though, that he Surprized you So much ; and did he, indeed, hold you in his arms fora minute? How I pity you! But you did stream, and that was as much as could be expedled of you* I knew you would behave with propriety. Though I do longto fee you^Cbarlotte, y&t I am generous enough to prefer the Marquis’s happinefs to my own ; fo keep him in London^ till he has thoroughly fatisfi-ed his curioSity. He cannot be better than where he now is. Had I forgot my Iriendihip for you, when I propofed your travelling, tlte-a-tdte^ with my Brother ? If it was not conSistent with the relpe6t due to appearances, to go a journey with a Single Gentleman, why then you niight very eaSily have obviated that objedion, by converting him into a married one. Come, come, Charlotte, this must be the cafe, one of thofe days; therefore, why Should you lost time ? I am certain, that, on
his.
1
i
260	L R T T E R XV.
his being united to you, depends h^s life ;• and' you are fenSible, that it would be impolSible for me ever to Survive his lofs, fliould you (which God forbid !) condemn him to death, by retuSing Him the honor of your hand. ConSider, my Dear, w C have always lived together ; and what material difference can it make, in converting the name of Friend, into that of Hufband ? ’Tb-only Suffer- | ing him to steep in your room, instead of his own,	:
and all things elfe will go on just as they ufed to	|
do. But Should you be So cruel, Charlotte, as to deny us the happinefs and honor of your alliance,, what a houfe of Sorrow will our’s be ? And how I will you upbraid yourfelf, for being the author of our iniSery ! No ; you are too generous, too just, to wound two hearts, which are devoted to you.
My friend, my Sifter, I conjure you to make my Brother happy I He deferves you ; you know he does; he dies for you. You are now in a country, where Settlements, &'C. will be better made for your Security, than here; I mean, with regard to your fortune ; his may be Settled as you like, on your return to Paris. You may marry in your own church, and afterwards (for form’s Sake) in our Ambassador’s chapel. Sophie will, a Second time, attend you to church, under happier aulpi-c«s. In Short, my dearest friend, let me, when we meet again, have the extatic pleaSure of Saluting you by the tender name of Sister ; let me See joy Sparkle in the eyes of my beloved Brother; and, to heighten the blils, let us owe our felicity to you. Make my best compliments acceptable, if you pleaSe, to all your family. Cnnfult my peace, and your own happinefs, my dear Charlotte ; and prove to me, that you have a real friendship for your truly affedlionate,	D’Anolville.
I stiail
r
L’^INIThR XIV.	a5t
I’fliall write to my brother by this post. Why do you threaten to drop my correfpo|i-dence ? I cannot confent to it; however, do but act right, and you may do what elfe you pleafe. I Shall hear how you do, and what you fay, by the Marquis, wliore letters are full of you.
L E T T E R XVI.
Va M^lemoifelle D’A R c e, v i L L E.
I Said I would not write to you any more, nor did I intend it, efpecially in aniwer to the last letter I received from you, which is now of u[)-wards of a month’s date.; in it you put the knife to my throat, Adelaid:; it stems as if all my friends had combined together, in order to perst-cute and distrefs me, and you more violently than any of the rest. Cruel friend ! how have I de-ferved tlrus to be threatened with becoming the murdrefsof thost, whofe lives I would readily fa-crifice my own to Save ? The Marquis has pleaded hiscaufe lo effectually with my family, that I have not a friend left in it: nay, even Sir Charles has joined with mv enemies, and does not heSitate to tell me, ‘‘ That your Brother is worthy of my hand, and that I ought to infure my future felicity, by uniting mystlf to him.” He adds, “ T’hat he' never Saw the man yet, till he was acquainted with the Marquis, who, as he thought, had delicacy of Sentiment enough to deferveme.” Your Brother has read to them, the letter I wrote to him, when he wasfo ill; indeed he teazed me, till I gave him leave fo to do. They all agree that I do love him,
only
262	LETTER XVI.
'Only that I don’t know it, and that I fliall not find it out, til! I am married to him. What nonSenfe is all this ? and how can he wifh to take me upon Such a precarious tenure ? Thus they unite to tear my heart to pieces. It I could perfuade mySelF, ' that 1 had a Sentiment tor the Marquis of a tenderer nature than that ot esteem, I would not hest-t ite a moment, but instantly confent to marry him ; hut my heart appears to me to be perfe£ily Silent upon tlie fubjeSl. I prefer him to all his Sex ;
I could even be his wife w'iihout reludance, but not with pleafure ; every mark which- he Ihews, of the violence of his paiSion for me, gives me pain ; I pity liim, and blame my own infenSibility; yet I Sometimes think, that I Ihould be Sorry if he loved me lefs. Sir Charles told me, the other night, “ That I was not a proper judge of my own feelings, becaufe I compared the violent agitations 1 had experienced in my first attachment, witli tlie calmer fenfibility of a riper judgment, and that, on the comparhon, not finding the 1 ime Symptoms, though proceeding (rom a paiallel caufe, I rastily concluded, that I v/as not in love with the Marquis, when it was vifible (he Said) to every one e!fe, how dear he was to mei” Is this true, Ade-hide F I cannot think fo. Adieu, my mind is upon the rack. Ah, how difficult to attain is a thorough knowledge of our own hearts ! Ir I know i mine, it is only alive to friendstiip, and dead totally to every tenderer fenlation. Your Brother drags me with him to every public place, till I am fatigued to deatli: He will go no where vvithout me. Every body astcs, Who he is ?” And my friends (as they call themfelves) always take care to an-Iwer, (in my hearing, too,) “ It is the Marquis D'Aife^ a French man of quality, who is come
over
LETTER XVII.	263
over to Ettgland, in order to marry Mrs. TVilliamsd* Is not tins inconceivably odd behaviour ? Your Brother has been preSented at Court by your Ambassador ; he looked like himfelf; I was there ; the King Spoke to him lor Some minutes. Once more your Servant : I am crofs, and tired, but love you as well as if I was better tertipered.
Yours,	C. Williams.
The Marquis whites you all the news, So don’t expect to hear from me again this age,
L E T T E R XVII.
T0 MademoiJelU D ’ A N g e v -i L L e.
d D E L A1D Ej, your Brother is pcrfediy wel’,
I give you my honor of it ; So be compofed ; and 1 u ill tell you the realon wliy this letter bec,ins with So strong an aSTurance of his health and laSe-ty : Tlie affair was this ; though I do nor think [ lhall give a very clear account of the matter, for 1 leally am hardly yet recovered Srom the fright It occasioned me. h'esterday we w^ent a party to the Opera ; 1 in my own (edan chair, becauSe I c.an’t bear the jolting of the streets of London in a coach, the rest of the company in their owm equipages. After the Opera was over, your Brother handed me out, and, as he was just putting me into my chair, a coach drove turioussy up to it ; the Marquis, with the hilt of his Sword, beat back the •iieads of the horfes, for fear they ssiould advance too tar, and overturn my chair: Upon which, one of them reared up on his hinder legs, and gave your Brother a blow, which struck him to the
ground ;
26a LETTER XVII.
ground; I Screamed, and fainted away ; what happened afterwards, I know not., only that I found myfelf alone with the Marquis, in his coach. Supporting me in his arms, and holding a bottle of fasts to my nofe. Having recovered my fenfes a little, I looked wildly round me, and afked, with terror, if he was not hurt ? He alTured me he was not; I could not believe him, and therefore repeated the question ; he then asseverated that he had received no injury, but a stight fcratch from the stroke of the horfe. I enquired how I came to be in his coach ? He replied, that our company were all gone into their feparate equipages, and were ignorant of the accident which had befallen us; and that not thinking it fafe for me, in the sttuation I then was, to go home in a chair, he had therefore taken the liberty of putting me into his coach, in order to have the greater care of me. I looked at him with astonishment, when 1 considered how near he was being killed a few moments before; this thought brought the tears into my eyes ; indeed they flowed down my cheeks; he peiceived they did So; when Seizing one of my hands, he preffed it cloSc to his boSom, laying, “ My dear Charlotte^ to what am I to aS-cribe the great lenSibility you So obligingly fliew on this occoSion ? Am I, indeed, dear to you? Speak, and make me the happiest of mankind.” I fliall not tell you my anSwer, Adelaide^ nor the rest of our conversation, till we arrived at my Brother’s: l..,et it Suffice for you to know, that the imminent danger in which I had just Seen the Marquis, taught me, that he was dearer to me than 1 had imagined him to be; in Short, on our arrival at home, the accident was related, with all the conSequences it had produced ; upon which my caufe was tried before all the company, and I being
# LETTER XVIIL	265
ing found guilty of loving your Brother, the jury unanimoussy, without quitting the rooni, condemned me to marry him before we left London, I pleaded, but could not be heard : upon winch 1 was obliged to Submit to the Sentence, and even gave my word for the execution of it. I tremble at the thought, but rest allured, that I flial! not recede from my word. The Marquis is out of his fenSes ; he cannot write, he Says, and (o 1 took the pen, in order to give you this information, knowing how delighted you would be at the news. If I Should not be happy now, what have you and the rest of my friends to anSwer for! I dare not think of it. Good b’ye, my dear; my next will probably be Signed, your affe61ionate Sister as well as sincere friend,
C Williams.
I don’t think I (liall write to you any more till_ ' I am married, becauSe I Shall have a vast deal to do, and more to think of, and the Adarquis tells me he writes to you constantly.
LETTER XVIII.
From the MarquisT)'to Mademoifelle D ’A Nr >	GL^LLE.
ADELAIDE, ^^^arest Sisier, rejoice_.at the felicity qC:^Bi>other, w-ho loves y|ui with the tenderest affe^^ion. Yesterday, jour lovely friend vowed herTelf minq for Me at the altar, in the preSence of her parents, brothers, Sisters, good l^iv. Smith, andmySelf; we were married twice over, as you must know. Th.e renewal ot a cere-
VoL. II.	H	mony,.
266	LETTER XVIII.
mony, the confequences of which had formerly 'been fo fate! to her peace, threw an air of timid fenSibility into my Cbarlotteh face, which rendered her, if possible, more interesting; she went through both the ceremonies with more reSolution than we expecsted from her; and, when all was over, she turned to me, and, with a Smile of the. most ineffable, good nature, Said, Ah, why is not my Adelaide here, to fill up the rweaSure of my contentment!” I thanked her in your name, as well as my own, for this obliging wish. In short Sister, her whole behaviour, during the day, was .attentive to the company, and kind to me ; Site was Serene, though not gay ; she was thoughtful, but not melancholy ; she was modest, but not prudish ; in a word, (he was, and is, divinely amiable : Her father, who is worthy of being So, both from his polite addreSs, and fine urrderstanding,
. shewed So thorough a latisfa61ion at our union, as, I Saw, gave infinite fatisfafiion to my Charlotte. Her mother, who is a most agreeal)le woman, was all gaiety and good humour ; and the worthy Mr. Smith cried for joy, to See his dear child, as he calls her, “ in the poffeSTion of an honest man thefe are his own words. Sir Charles Stanly ([\ook me by the hand, and laid, looking at me pathetically, “ Marquis, you are now the happiest of mankind ; and, (continued he,) 1 really believe you deferve my Sister, if any man can be Said to be worthy of fo inestimable a treaSure as she is.” V'e dined in the country, and the day passed w'ith the utmost good humour ancScheartulnefs. My adorable wife stands at my elbow whilst I am waiting ; all my ideas are concentred in her ; she is my existence. I can Say no more ; for how vain would it be iof me to attempt to deScribe my preSent hap-
pinefs I
!
► /
LETTER XIX.	267
fineSs ! Receive, my dear Sister, our joint loves. We are one, Adelaide^ and yours, by the tender* est ties of friendthip^and affe<9tion,
The Marquis and Marchionefs D’AiSE.
P. S. Meet us at Calais ; we will let you know the day, which is not yet fixt. Had not your' unaccountable fear of the water oppofed our wishes, you might now have been a partaker of our felicity. All the family here fend a million of compliments to you. Adieu.
LETTER XIX.
My dear Adelaide,
This day fortnight your Brother, myfelf, and my Brotherpropofe being at Calais, but we must depend upon the wind, for the certainty of meeting you there precifely on that day. We Shall,, however, do our part, not to difap-point you.
The Marquis is fo much delighted with England, that he has promifed to return to it next year, with Sir Charles and his Lady, who, you know, are to pay us a visit at Paris ; nay my good friend and Second father, Mr. Smith, declares, he will immedirtely fettle his affairs here, and end hisdays with us in France. He made his will the other day, in which he has generousty made me his heir to ten thoufand pounds, which, after paying Some Sew legacies, is pretty near all he is worth. He read it to the Marquis, who inSisted, that the money Should be left in Such a manner, as that I might poffefs it for my Sole and Separate uSe : protesting, at the fame time, that he would not even have it in
his
26B	letter XIX.
his power, either to receive, or difpoSe of a farthing of it, T oppofed this his request with vehe* mence, but was over-powered by numbers, every body present declaring, that it was just it Should be So. I must confeSs to you, Adelaide, that your Brother’s behaviour upon this, as well as every o-ther occaSion, is So nobly great,, and generous, that it raiSes my admiration of, whilst it augments my esteem for, his charaSler. On the other hand his excefs of love, and tendernefs for me, melts my heart to a degree of fenSibility, which L am almost ashamed of; I attempt still to keep up my dignity, hut Sfear my anions too frequently betray my weaknefs. The Marquis tells me, twenty times a day, that he is Sure I love him : And this thought feems to make him fo extaticaly happy, that I cannot, be fo cruel, as to contiadict him.
I am loaded with prefents for you, my Dear, from Several individuals of my family ; your Bro- ♦ ther, too, has exerted the utmost powers of hb imagination, in the choice of Some trifles, which he thinks may be acceptable to you, as being the produce of this country : My little offering will accompany the rest. I long to See you, my dear Adelaide, though I shall feel a pang at parting from my friends, and relations, here. Adieu, my fweet i girl, till we meet, when I shall endeavour, by every action of my life, to prove to you, how truly I am, my dearest Sister, your ever affeSlionate and faithful friend.
The Marchionefs D’AlSE.
My hushand fends his love, in which we all join.
FINIS.	!
(
I
I	A	„
-A	^	’	- .	.	---i'
•	-	^ s'	“	*	'	S-
r - ■' ■	- ■ ■	-
r, ■	•	, .,	■	. ■	,	, ■■•■■	'= -r'r
‘ si '
'-'•*■■	■■■	*'	-	V '•■ —*-
T .	7:	-	• ■ • ;	;	,	■	. „	■	-. -■
,vi	-	■	-	lir'- ■.. ■ ■:	•	.
t' ■. -	. •	-■	■ i.i V	r, .
' ■'	- - v"	.	' '' S • f' •
■	-I'-'	'	•	-	■	. i
•;• --^>	•	•	^	‘	'	.	-t
'41'-^	' '	I	»	■
- .	■ C	“h	■. •<
A' ■■	.■ nNN	... - .
'"- •V/C . ;. V.;.: ^^. T-^ ■ •.■'^	. .'tT ■ ..	’'- v. ^;C:''.D-
■'-, '.N	: --	, •■	'	,	' ■ "-.ii	■■■
i- 'J	.	.'	’	‘	^ V"’
V- -	. -	. V V.. ■	'	,	'^- ri	■	• •
>	,	. V. ■	. ('	f	‘-t...	■.• •:•.	...	'	.	,
-	■■ •'■.-	■.	'.i;	\ ''	-	,c
-	-i . A "'; : ./ .V ■ ’ ■	’	‘	‘,
■ ' S ' r ..o ■'.':srid.' '"'L'l
... S .	^ ‘ c L■'. •	;.-i
■/	''	:	. ■	..'.V	■.■■■'•■	; ' V'-: -
'S- , TT 'N--' v' '	•' ■
Ac ‘ '	/■ ' ’	/ ' '. ,S ; ;
■'	*■ ' " •'■-• ■ ; i/ V	‘ Ac • ,A
,	f	-■	, t',	' , .^, ;v' ‘. *
. r^'V~ T ' , ■*	'■	-
• , * ~ ■ '.' . ••■ ' - - - ^
-i<N	'~'Fy
' •' ■■ '.v r	‘	^	■
■	'Ac;- A '/	^■■	‘ ‘	\	-,.
,’*'■*>* ' . . . • '
' ♦	f- T' -	»	'	»	.
. A , i	\	.	^	-	»
S-- '	*	•	' ■	'	*■	'	'
Mt:	- '	' L ^ t . ■' 'A.ri
1-T:	■■	■■	■.:	'	»■
j	^	'	■	V
^	.	' ■	"	t .
b'	^ ■■ ■ *i' ~
L .	■ ■	-	'. - 'a ■	.
V"'	■	■	Lb-.D/'C..
'	'"■'■: - t '	'	'	' - ’	■ '	.; 5#
' ' ■ ;	, '	C-"-
; .	:; , ■ ■/	S. ''
V-.- ^
• ». •, . . .' - „ ' ..fd-fe:i' -	:•	^	.
b ■	' ■ '	‘	*,	• '■ •'.C c t h.’
i	••''■.■	•* .	• ■*
. ■ ■ ' ' \ ■ ■ •
' • .	;	■	'•CN'*	' '>	■'
'•■■ '	, - -. * ,	‘1	. 'j: .: r ■-' ' '	•
-i ' ’ ' ; - . ■’, X' ■
:	- bb ,.' ‘ b‘0."
'.. -' *' ^ ■ ;. ^
.■ . ‘I	'	'•	ij; .	..._	•	’'	^
-f ■	'C,- ■ ■	■ '	•' ' '■-’■ • '
yc' ,;■,	,-.	./ A<■ -V '/--'n
1^'.	.	-,	j*-'C. 'S'-:^
, ■ ' '■ •
r r	'	''	- ' . C
C ■	■	f '.D	’ A	h .
-'	* ' f	^
- ■ b/ %-S -0 . - V„	’ ,
“tL-/	• :-C-
*	i ---	.
k ■ , ,a'v , ;	;	' ^ -	/	■ -
•«rt	• . .
■	‘	.T.., c h
. .	-. •,	D-	c .- ^
.	■ ■ r'te *	‘	: ■_ V.	.	•	'- ' cV'Sb.^
'	■'• ' .A ’	_	» i	.	'	'	A .' '	--L,
-A'.''-'*: ■■	"
T N/ ■ ' '•■. ■" 'V.«■■, ^
tP '	■ -	‘	'’"
'.A -.. \ ' '.; " ‘>
lA .	'	y ' '..■	. * ....
•	■	- V	"■	^	.	1	.
N.'*	^ ■ Ff'd. ■
ri- - 'b' '
■ ' -■ Tite' --ST T.\',^;:	.t-s
r '■’ • V • S,v.‘'O./;
■A ■ "	- Vr f
} ..ijt	*	'* ■ ’V - m '\ '	■"
^ ■■ "
-A?A\	■■ ■	'■	:. --•
Ath ' ■-••■■	•■	■ :V: :';,V
-	^	:^M
^'i V '*"^---i''-^ ''"A. f^'^'f'il I w^^M
-r-^ =•	te' ’’>'■%•
•	-y :i. •• • “' .	.
- ■ .-.	■	.• .	f-:-V^	wS^M
V"	'- '^^
i ■ ‘	•	''■	'V 'v'*	•■	'i' *■	* ;«
'	\r:	^	■ ■ '^ '” ■ ‘	' 'Vy''	■
'	X	■ -	'	^	'“T	^	^
:	f FA
T " ■ ■	/:.
i,;'-	■	■	'	■	' ..
'■	■	••	i-. ' '■'
I	‘ ■	.	■	r^'
/.	, ■■■■;	■	,■ ■,	'S'
' ■ '■]. V- : ■
S -h
P-ii- ^ j' " '. S -.i.-	^	;■ b ■' ;; , ■■■ /r '- V.
te ' Tr
Tvy;|
AkWoiiis'||
, ■ ■■'' :,v'Jj
i '4^. : . ,
.! ■	I
’ , :■ ii t
VL
i ---■ <'