' fiR^LL:.. ■ ;f'^ -	C'"' ■''■■h'l
•'(■	' ■ ■ c	'	■ ":	■
Sl;0/ ■ C ..: ■	■'	:	^	■	’ -4 -
i T' ' ' ' - '	'	'• ■	' ’ '	'■ i ■■ A"
j\i i" '	■	.'■'■■■	' / ■ . ■	— .
Lfite ■ ■ • ■ 'V- ' . • ^-■■■■'■- ' ■	. c
. d ■ ■ -	■ V . . . L C	^ >■/■.. ■"■' b '
K- ....... S..: - ■'■■■ ■:■-■' ': ' S"'''.-S'	'^S'-'-f
j[iSt^..V'y ' ■'■. /h:.: "■■' ssi|
■. ‘ ■ ■ ' '^- A--*' '
' -
^ '. ^
•i	A
' J,	'
; ' '	•
% '
^ ' - ' / '
%
/
\
A /	.
GHEHME ,^5	.:
»	*isw L SEOQfiD-Hilli.'
^■ ■ / ; ' ■■' '••■.^- >A
'■
\ .
' V	'■■**	'
■ ' / ' ''
• ■	'	•	■	.	'	' i
■ ' ' ,.'*' • ' ' '
*'• ^ '.••/■ .. . ' ■
■-'■ N ' ‘	^ - '^
^	•	-i. ;•'	■	.	."^	-	-	'
T . . - ■ ■■	■^ ■'■'	^ ■ '"'•'■' ■'■' ■■:	' i -	.
i.y. ■'- ■-	, • , ' '	■'	,	■' ■■
A . ■■ A '/ A
A ^ '
4	,	■	■	.	/	■
.	-■/	f ..■ ...■■ '■	.■,■■■■■■
, ■ ■ - ,	. - ' y.';
. -f - c ■■ ^ ■ S.
-	■	.	' '	-A t ^	.
• :	-	'	/ ■	,	:	*	' f f:' *
■ > ‘	A
'	'	-	'‘	■ '■■. -	■' ■ ^	V .	,	■
' -W> ; -	... *' ^ * ^	i	;■■
'; i -	A_.	• C ^	\	'	'
'	'	'	A	'	'	j	'	I	'
■ ; i j . ■ N •	' i ' . ^ C ■ ■ .	■	■ * ;/	'
i-v ,'	; . ' \	i:
■' '-i'C, ■' .-A.	r' /-'i
ri r '	,	'	’	' •	■	-i'
- ■ '■ ' ■' >■
• -'"ct
FEMALE FRIENDSHIP:
INNOCENT sufferer.
/ A
MORAL NOVEL.
VOLUME THE FIRST, j
Virtue alone is happinefs below,
“ And our best knowledge is, ourfelves to know.”
DUBLIN:
Printed for J. Willi ams, J. Porter, and T. Walker. Mdcclxx.
:i H T ^ O
TH^DOHTH ■'
A
.J H Y O M J A. .Ji O M
;ShK 1 •! an a 1/ •.! .i-n /
■  mm I !■ tm^irno* ■ in-     n.m,mivwa^ 'm»m> n.m wwi»to»*«wnwii.- ^
,wobd aliciqqtd ril oj-dn 5iOi’7 ’'.*.voi:'I c: r.ovfsNao ,-‘iS	h-d \uo l.-nA
\
'!
:ki I a si u a
T ;t osi ,T A i.? .ii .7 d Ai \!j:sihri f" ..xxj3>c/iS ,ii:i4 \ t V7 .'■
.	I
'	■	N	^
INTRODUCTION.
Mr. Toper’s maxim, that The proper study of mankind, is man,
Being fully and generally admitted, it necessarily follows, that well drawn charadler-istic piQures of life, though fabulous, are a commendable and profitable branch of literary composition ; as they prepare an attentive, intelligent reader for Scenes of real afl;ion ; and if the fuper-struQure be raifed from a moral foundation; without which, however beautiful the component parts, it must fall before the breath of rational criticism ; then, while it delights the imagination, it improves both the head and heart: a large majority, especially of the fair Sex, have not time nor talents for the investigation of ab-stra«si: principles in moral and Social life ; wherefore a lighter kind of study is essential : and even the greatest proSelytes of profound Speculation, may unbend their minds, by perufal of a well pen’d novel, both with pleaSure and advantage; Several of this tendency might be pointed out, were they not already generally known and acknowledged. It is true, the Spanisti novellists still remain unrivalled, for delicacy of Sentiment, and strength of charadler; but their pictures being, in general, romantic caricaturas; our lighter and fainter drafts have more original reality to recommend them; though it is to be feared, A 2	that
iv INTRODUCTION.
that many authors, through necessity or avarice, exerciSe their pens for gain ; and though we have too many instances, of wretches^ ready to propagate vice, for pecuniary advantage ; yet, to the honour of the prefent age, it may be Said, that no licentious piece, beyond a half-penny ballad meets encouragement: wherefore the worst charge that can be brought against produ6tions of this nature, at prefent being trifling ; fo that there is little danger of prejudice, should there even be Small hopes of improvement to the mind.
Notwithstanding profeffed critics launch their mortal darts at every produSion. that iffues from the prefs, and generally attack the most helplefs most unmercifully ; the author of what follows, hopes, as he does not lay in any peculiar claim to striking merit; as he professes himfelf a young inexperienced adventurer, warmly attached to moral redlitude, and more difpofed to be grave in the caufe of virtue, than ludicrous at her expence ; he hopes to gain protetSfion from the ladies, and indulgence from thofe who examine the piece with a more critical eye: possessed of this flattering idea, he Submits himfelf to public candor, without multiplying prefatory apologies, further than to premife, that he has not adhered to a stridl dramatic catastrophe, which, if a deficiency, he hopes, among others, will .be cxcufed, as he previoussy confesses, that Some of his cha-raders are introduced merely as foils to others, without any defign of difpoSing them according to the rules of poetical justice.
FEMALE
#	iTwitf jar^*5ttF
«S	3li'*\JH^ aK'^JiS	»&
^5^	’y
FEMALE FRIENDSHIP:
O R T H E
INNOCENT SUFFERER. CHAP. I.
Know then this Truth, (enough for Man to know) Virtue alone is Happinefs below.
Pope’s Essay on Man.
IR EIenry Summers was a mail X S ?*S l^y nature formed fenSible, open, ik*- •-' Xi compassionate to the dissrestes of j^jg fellow creatures, which he never looked on without pitying, nor was pity all he bestowed ; he too well knew the pain which that passion must give a feeling mind (when unaccompanied by assistance) ever to refufe his, to merit in distrefs. By art his natural fenfe was refined into wifdom, and his own A 3	generosity
6 A MORAL NOVEL, generofity of fentiment gave him a humane po-litenefs of behaviour which gained him univerfal refpedt. By fortune he was blessed with an ample Sufficiency to indulge every benevolent wissi of his expanded mind : luxurious or whimSica! Superfluity never rendered him incapable of assisting unhouSed poverty. In short, he only regarded his riches as they gave him an opportunity of contributing to the Support of deferving or necessitous objedls.
While his charadier was refpedted even by ihoSe who were not perfonally acquainted with him, his behaviour created admiration and affection in all who were. In friendship he was fin-cere, constant in danger, and patient in adverfity which he more than once had felt. To thefe qualifications he had joined the excellent addreSs of living (which is most hard to do) without reproach. Yet, notwithstanding he was thus endowed with every virtue that can truly form the amiable,-generous, honest man ; he had, in common \yith all human kind, his particularities; but they were Such as rather to be the objedls of applaufe than cenfure : His praifes were too constant in the mouth of every one not to reach his own ear, and being well convinced of the Solidity of his judgment, he expedied a due deference to be paid thereto by all who had the least depen-dance on, or connexion with him ; he had a pleafing dignity of countenance, which rendered him at once the objeQ; of esteem and reverence ;
there
A MORAL NOVEL. 7 there was a little tin6lure of warmth and felf-fufficieney in his disposition, which made him rather impatient of controul: yet, after what I have faid of this gentleman, there requires no great Sagacity to difcover, that what all allowed to be his virtues, far outweighed what Some chofe to call his faults.
Sir Harry, fo early as eighteen, had contracted an acquaintance with a young lady of fortune, which, in a fhort time, grew into the most dist interested love; and being a man of too much fensibility ever to think of her on any other than honourable terms, he confulted her father, who cruelly rejeCled his propoSals, not from any dif-like to his perfon, family, or fortune, which were all unexceptionable, but on account of his youth ; partially imagining, that he could not be endowed with fo much Solidity, as to six the volatile, wandering affeCtions of fo early a period of life, upon one objeCt, however valuable; therefore considered his pastion but as a flight of inconsiderate youth, which, in a stiort time after the accomplishment of his wisties, would naturally wear off: thus, through an over-refined degree of caution, the anxious father oppoSed the only step which could inSure bis daughter’s happinesis. Thus it often happens in life, that by earnestly endeavouring to avoid one error, we inevitably fall into its opposite,
A 4	This
a AMORAL NOVEL.
This refufal, of courSe, put a flop to the frequent interviews with which the young couple had before found means to indulge themfelves ; yet, notwithstanding it deprived them of the few Sweet minutes perfonal conferences afforded, they, lover-like, industrioufly found means to hear constantly from each other ; two of which letters I here prefent to my readers. The first, which is from Sir Harry, was wrote the day after he received the refufal from her father.
CHAP. TI.
.—-------Thither write, my love.
And with my eyes I’ll drink the words you fend, Tho’ Ink be made of gall.
Cymbeline.
Sir Harry Summers to Mifs Amelia.
WHAT words, most dear Amelia, can exprefs my feelings at this jundlure; Why fhould I inform you of what (I fear) you nhust already have heard—the reception I yesterday met with from your father ? He ordered me to forget you. Oh 1 my i®mily, think what a perfon, who loves like me, must feel at fuch a fen-tcnce : but (thank heaven) I have still one gleam of comfort to fupport my drooping fpirits; I cannot think you ever will be induced to join in fuch
cruelty.
A MORAL NOVEL. 9
cruelty. In that fond hope alone I live. After the repealed assurances of regard I have received from my dearest ^Emmy, I should be unworthy the Smallest glimmering of refpea, were I to fup-pofe that a Separation like this, can alter her generous, tender way of thinking. Yet, though I am fully conScious of your flattering Sentiments, allow me to feel.—Your own delicate mind will do me the justice to Suggest, how far a thought of loSing you must affea me : let me avoid it, lest I Sink beneath a painful weight of apprehension.—Yet, can I be thus divided from you, and loSe the thought of what I should feel from an eternal Separation ?—Forgive me, if I cannot force it from my mind : admit my fears as a proof of my regard but I wrong you to think you’ll look upon them in any other light than as the unavoidable palpitation of a heart which loves-you to distradtion.—Alas! why did I ever experience the happy moments we’ve Spent together, since they now only Serve to make my mifery the more Severe ?—May you not feel this pafting^ as I do !—Whatever is my lot, may you for ever taste felicity !-—I once indeed flattered myfelf, that I should have been in Some meaSure conducive thereto; that by my attention to your wants, and constant afliduity to pleaSe, I should have made mySelf worthy of the heart which I hoped would have given me your hand, and thereby rendered your happinefs complete,—Oh ! what a delightful situation, when we have the pleasing consideration, that every adlion of outlives adds to 5	the.
lo A MORAL NOVEL.
the felicity of thofe we love !—From this thought there arifesan unwearied reciprocal desire to pleafe, which turns even the common occurrences of life, into proofs of a sincere and permanent regard. How much more delight do we then feel, than thofe whofe breasts are not fufceptible of So delicate a refinement ? This, my iEmily is a situation I once hoped to have reached; but alas! why do I still think thereof, since it can now afford but a momentary fatisfafliion, and only Serve to make me return to the profpe<9: before me with more reluctant regret—a profpeft that I cannot think or look on without stiuddering ?— Forgive me for faying that under thefe circumstances ; you will, by still assuring me of your regard, add new life to
The affliaed
H. SUMMERS.
To Sir Harry Summers S I R,
According to a maxim of the kindest mother, [for Such I was once blessed with] acknowledging a generous, disinterested passion for a de-ferving objea, is most minutely consistent with delicate modesty ; where I shall make no Scruple of Gonfeffing, that your lettjer has raifed very contrary feelings. Your professions of love are flattering, but your doubts father otherwife. The concessions ycur lender folicitations drew
from
A MORAL NOVEL. ii from me before our prefent difagreeable Separation I shall ever adhere to, even though a father’s unreasonable difpleafure should be the confe-quence. Let this undifguifed effusion ol an art-kfs heart quiet thofe uneafy Senfations which too plainly appear in your letter. Once more rest assured of sincerity on my side, as a return for your obliging wishes and inclinations to promote and fecure my happinefs. I could dwell much . longer on the pleasing theme of mutual regard and sincerity, but that a parent’s harsh commands intrude, and hurry me to a conclusion, with this assurance, that I am, with inviolable attachment, &c. &c.
iEMILI A.
CHAP. III..
Soft Pity is the fairest flow’r	'
Heaven e’er planted in the mind ;
The queen of virtues, whofe foft pow’r Gan e’en to Oodhead raife mankind.
Opera of Tom Jones..
Many more letters passed between Sir Harry and his iEmily, but as most of them only contained the fame assurances of regard in other words, and as love letters, no more shan love stenes, are amusing to any but the parties s
12 A MORAL NOVEL, ties concerned, I fliall Hot trouble my readers ■with any more than thefe two, which may Serve as a Specimen of the stile and contents of all the others. Let it Suffice to fay, that Sir Harry, having made another application to her father, and having received the fame refufal, our lovers determined to make a stolen match ; which being effected. Sir Harry would have thrown him-Self at his wife’s father’s feet, but the old gentleman absolutely refufed to fee either of them, and taking this imprudent step too nearly to heart, it in a Short time finished his days; nor could he ever be prevailed upon to fee his daughter, but obstinately carried his refentment to the grave, as a proof of which, he bequeathed all he was worth to a distant relation of his wife’s. This accident happening when Lady Summers was pregnant, a mifcarriage was the confequence, followed by a violent fever, which In a few days put an end to her life: and thus was Sir Harry left a widower at the age of twenty-two, as a mourning monument of the fatal effects of filial disobedience.
So quick and So impresting a Series of misfortunes cast a gloom upon his countenance, which it v'as not In the power of time to remove, any more than the fettled refolution he made, on his wife’s death, of neverentering again into that state, wherein he had been fo unlucky in his first attempt. He therefore lived, as I before Said, the objeft of every one’s admiration and esteem,
striving
A M O R A L N O V E L. 13 striving to do all the good in his power. He partook of all the pleafures of life, without running into any of the abfurdities; and although he was more delighted with the amufements which he met with at his feat in Yorkfhire, as being the more rational, yet when in town, as he constantly was half the year, he frequented every public place of diverfion, to avoid the chara6Ier of misanthrope, which, from his fettled melancholy, fome few officious people had chofe to honour him with. He was about the age of forty, when the following affair happened.
Early one morning in February, when on his return from Carliste-honfe, he was Surprized by feeing a croud of watchmen round his door, occasioned, as he difcovered on enquiry, by a balket just then picked up, which, to his great astonishment, was found to contain a female child, of (Seemingly) about a month old. On his nearer approach, he obferved a paper pinned to its breast, on which were wrote, in a neat Italian hand, thefe words:
“ Stranger-, •uuhofoe'^er thou art^ that-d.ind.fi this lucklefs babe, Jhut not your ears againf the tender cries of youthful innocence, but pity, -cherijh, and receive her ; in return for which fie will far overpay your generous care by her' endearing prattled’
This
14 A MORAL NOVEL.
This was So forcible an application to the humanity of Sir Harry, (than whom no man had a greater share) that he could not withstand the natural impulfe of his heart, but ordered the child to be conveyed into his houfe, and to have all immediate care taken of it.—Thus to a heart fo fufceptible of tendernefs, thefe few words pleaded the caufe of this helplefs infant, in full as effectual a manner, and perhaps with more fuccefs, than whole volumes on the fubjeft, from the ablest hands, could have done.
So singular an adventure employed Sir Harry’s thoughts great part of that time which he would otherwife have appropriated to rest ; but this circumstance, the more he considered it, the more it bewildered his ideas : in short, it was an endlefs maze of perplexities. He could not believe thofe lines to be the produce of any common hand, either from the stile or writing, nor did he know any one on whom to six his fufpici-ons : however, after fome hesitation, he yielded fully to the humane dictates of his heart, by refolving to furnish the child with every necessary, and, as she turned out, to six her in the world. This refolution afforded him the tacit: praife of what he had determined ; nor was he a little strengthened in his design by the affeO;-ing fmiles which fat upon the infant’s countenance, when he went to enquire after it, and give orders for her nurfery. He was just fat; down to breakfast, when Mr. Modish entered
thS:
A MORAL NOVEL. 15
the room, to inquire after the company he had Seen at Carlifle-houfe the preceding evening.
CHAP. IV.
Mr. Modish was a young gentleman of fortune, by nature endowed with a good understanding, but unhappily much over-run with the weed of inattention. He was a distant relation of Sir Harry’s, who having a real regard for him, with pain obferved the ridiculous circumstances of his behaviour, which he always, like a true friend, endeavoured to amend by admonishment, wherever he Saw occaSion. Sir Harry’s mind was fo full of the last night’s adventure, that the first compliments were Scarce passed, when he told the whole affair to Modish, who having heard him to the end with great attention, taking his hand with a triumphant laugh, replied:—“ Sir Harry, I give you joy. ’Egad, “ I’m glad to, fee any honest fellow, who has “ Spirit enough to acknowledge his gallantry.-— I really began to fear, we were all reverting to “ the antideluvian state, when an amour v/as looked upon as a crime. You know, 1 in par-ticular was never fond of thofe primseval no-“ tions, and always thought you rather too “much addi<5fed to them.—Well! and pray— “ Now, what happy girl has had the honour of converting you to my way of thinking ?— “ What—it is a Secret, I fuppofe.—She b'd you not kifs and tell, ha! Sir Harry ?—’Gad ! I
began
s6 A MORAL NOVEL.
began to give you up for an obstinate heretic, ** in whom it was impostible to work a reforma-tion. V/ell—I fuppofe it is to be fent to nurfe “ in the country to a tenant’s wife, who was for-“ merly your houfe-keeper; and when he is a-“ bout twelve years old, brought to town as the Son of a poor clergyman, for whom you have a great regard; then a few years Schooling, “ and a cornetcy in the guards, finisties the whole “ affair.—Well, upon my foul ! you are a hap-“ py fellow, who have no check upon your plea-
“ fures from a deficiency in your purfe.”-
This gentleman’s volubility of tongue was So great, that Sir Harry was obliged to let him run on thus far, before he could convince him of his mistake with regard to the fex of the child, and which he had before forgot to inform him ef; but when he heard it was a girl, after near a minute’s paufe, he cried, “ A girl!—that’s un-“ lucky: however, we must make the best of a bad bargain.—Why, she must, of courSe, be nurfed in the country ; and, let me fee—-oh! ** bring her to London as your ward, the only ** daughter of a particular friend who died in in the West Indies:—ay, ay, that will do: ** —and then a couple of thoufand pounds, or “ So, may make her the wife of Some honest ci* tizen, who has more money than wit.”—-—In vain did he protest the child was not his own; Modish, could not believe, that any man would thus adopt a perfefit stranger to him: however, on Sir Harry’s firm protestations, he began
to
A MORAL NOVEL. 17
to have rather a different opinionWell, (fays he) if the child is not your’s, I think you did wrong to take any notice,of her.—For my “ own part, it is a Settled rule with me, to pro--** vide for no man’s offspring but my own, and “ not even them at all times.”-For fhame, for shame ! (cried Sir Harry, not a little net-‘‘ tied at his relation’s dissolute fentiments) I am ** Sorry to See a man, to whom nature has been “ bountiful both in understanding and fortune, “ make So bad an uSe of either, as to be dire6l-“ ed, in the performance of the moral duties of “ life, by that fashionable folly, that plea, “ for the commishon of every crime, Cujiom. “ Charles, you know I’m your friend, and ’tis my ** friendship tells you, that however you may “ have been taught to believe otherwise by the “ company you have kept, yet be affured, upon “ the word of a man who has Seen and knows “ the world, that chastity is as noble a qualifica-tion in our Sex as in the female, though, to “ our shame be it Spoken, in the prefent age it “ Seems totally excluded from the catalogue of “ male virtues: nor indeed can I hardly blame “ our youths for a breach thereof, not only be-“ cauSe they have never been taught to consider it in the light of a crime, but becauSe they “ have no incitement thereto from the only part ** of the creation they naturally expefl it from, I mean, that clafs of females distinguished by ‘‘the appellation of modest women; a tender union with whom, in Some part or other of
our
i8 AMORAL NOVEL.
our lives, we all esteem as our ne plus ultra', “ and want of chastity being no impediment to Such an alliance, we confequenily are not So felicitous about poffesting this virtue as we o-therwife stiould be : for let a man commit e-very folly, every vice, which youth, intem-perance, or his impaflioned inclinations prompt “ him to, and he will never feel the confequen-“ ces from thofe who, by the coolnefs of their “ behaviour, ought to exprefs their diflike of “ Such proceedings. On the contrary, amours \ ‘‘ with variety of women give a man an air of “ greater confequence, and more probability of “ fuccefs with the rest of the fex. Can any thing be a stronger proof of the truth of this “ assertion, than that proverbial expression which ‘‘ we So constantly hear come from the mouths “ of females of every rank, and of the truth of ‘‘ which they feem all to be So well convinced, viz. That a reformed rake makes the best hufband. In Short, young gentleman, what-<< ever fafhion or depraved appetites may difitate, ** Spirit with prudence, and love with virtuous ** constancy, are the Sheet anchors of moral and “ Social happinefs.”"" ■ ■■■■■Bravo! (cried Mo-“ disti, after a ssiort Silence) pray, proceed:— upon my word, Sir Harry, you have ha-“ rangued with the gravity of a biShop: fo you “ mean, by this fine, grave. Sentimental orati-“ tion, to make me believe, that this girl is not “ your own. But pray, my dear Summers, joking apart, do you really look upon keep-
“ ing
A MORAL NOVEL. 19
ing a mistrefs in the light of a crime ?”--
Sir,” (Said Sir Harry, frowning, much amazed at the question, after what he had just been faying) ‘‘ I am obliged to go out at prefent, on “ fome particular buSinefs; if you will favour “ me with your company to dinner, by four, at “ the Thatch’d Houfe, I may perhaps tell you “ fome more of my thoughts on this fubjeft.” ** Agreed, (faid he) though, upon my foul! I am engaged to meet Lord, Squander, Billy “ Rattle, and fome others, to dinner, at the “ Shakefpeare, from thence to proceed, in bat-tie array, to astist at the damnation of a new ‘‘ comedy; but you are fuch a holy witch, (as “ the poet fays) that you enchant Society to you, “ and I have really now kept your company fo “ long, that I begin to find more Solid pleafure ‘‘ in hearing your rational difeourfe, than in the ‘‘ noify mirth of my bottle companions: I will therefore w'ait upon you, though, by fo doing, I stiall difoblige fome of the honest fellows
“ (except yourfelf) in the univerfe.”-“ For
“ which (replied Sir Harry) I fhall not be Sorry, ‘‘ But pray, have you read this new play, which you thus intended to have strangled in the
“birth?”-----“ Not I, upon my foul! (faid
he.) I don’t even know the author.”———* “ And how could you, (rejoined his friend) be cruel enough, for the fake of a few minutes “ diverfion, perhaps to ruin a man, whofe only *‘ profpe6is may depend on the fuccefs of this night’s piece; even before you can know, whe-
“ ther
20 A MORAL NOVEL “ ther it is deferving of your cenfure or ap-** plaufe	Nay, that (replied Modifh)
“ is confidering it in too Serious a light. I never troubled my head about its merit; but it ** would be making a riot, which is my delight. “ But adieu till four.”—And thus they parted ,; Sir Harry, to go about the buSinefs he had mentioned, and Modifh, to take his ufual turn in the Mall; after which, he met his friend, according to appointment, and had the pleafure of hearing his farther thoughts ‘on the fubjedl they had that morning started; but as the particulars of their conversation never came to my knowledge, and were, 1 prefume, similar to thofe already mentioned, let it fuffice to fay, that Sir Harry, in confequence of the conversation, was more confirmed in the principles of humanity and protedfion to his ward or rather adopted daughter. He went home, his mind replete with thofe pleafing fenfations, of which no one can be a competent judge, whofe foul is not e-qually expanded, equally fufceptible of delicate ideas,
CHAP.
A MORAL NOVEL. 21 CHAP. V.
—---------She is young, wife, fair ;
In thefe to Nature she’s immediate heir;
And thefe breed honour. That is honour’s Scorn, Which challenges itfelf, as honours born,
And is not like the Sire. Honours best thrive. When rather from our zfis we them derive.
Than our forefathers.
All’s WELL THAT ENDS WELL.
TH E confequence of the converfation which Sir Harry had with Modish, as related in the last chapter, was an immediate application of his time to the preparation of every thing which might conduce to the eafe and happinefs of his adopted child, whom he now determined to educate in London, that he might not feem to pay any attention to the many ill-natured infin-nuations which he constantly heard, and still ex-peded to hear, about fo extraordinary an affair, from the major part of the world. However, equally regardlefs of their cenfure or their praife, he still nobly perfevered in the execution' of his first defign, with regard to the education of that child, whom (in memory of his once dear partner) he had christened by the name of ^mily, and whofe benignant shales, whenever she approached, he confidered as fo many grateful returns for his humanity, in the prefervation bf her life.
As
22 A MORAL NOVEL.
As Soon as her tender mind was adjudged capable of retaining any impressions, he prepared masters to inssru6t her in every thing Suiting her age and fejc, which she took fast as ’twas minif-ter’d ; and he had Soon the Satisfadiion of hearing her, in unaffected strains, exprefs her thanks for the many favours he daily bestowed on her, and which never failed to put him in mind of thofe remarkable words, which the reader may remember were found upon her breast. He was in Some doubt whether to acquaint her with this circumstance or not; but judging that a difcovery of that nature might, from the gene-roSity and laudable pride of her mind, when she considered herfelf as an objeCl of charity, occasion a referve in her behaviour, which would deprive him of the pleafure of her open and ingenuous conversation, he chofe, rather than run this hazard, to impofe upon her by an information that she was his niece; and as he always made a distinction between a falsity, contrived with a premeditated design to do an injury, and one with an innocent intention, he had on this occasion no other feelings, than thofe which confcious virtue always experiences on the performance of any good aCtion. However, that she might not always remain a stranger to what fo nearly concerned her, he wrote an account thereof, which, with the paper above-mentioned, being inclofed In his will, were committed into the hands of his attorney.
iEmily
AMOR A.D NOVEL. 23
^mily was now endowed with a perfon far from contemptible; but having affairs of much more confequence to take notice of, I Shall not detain my readers with a minute account of thoSe qualifications which can refle6I no honour on her nobler parts, being qualifications, (if they deferve that name) which every woman is equal* ly liable to poffefs in as eminent a degree as her-felf ; but to her honour be it fpoken, that, added to agreeable external endowments, ffie had a ihind replete with every amiable virtue.
Sir Harry, now confidering her in every re-fpefl as his niece, accompanied her to all places of public entertainment; but she was far too fenSible, to receive any folid fatisfaflion from the enjoyment of any of the prefent modish diversions, except the Theatre, which she considered as not only proper for refining our fenti-ments and ideas, but as the most luxurious treat the human understanding is capable of enjoying. No wonder then, that she was an almost constant attendant there, efpecially when performances of an edifying cast were exhibited.
The residence of her uncle (that being the light in which she now considered Sir Harry) in Yorkshire, during the fummer feafon, to which place she always accompanied him, gave her a full opportunity of purfuing her' favourite arnufe-ments, reading and walking; in the lattM* of
which
24 A MORAL NOVEL, which she found an additional pleafure, being generally accompanied by a neighbouring young lady, for whom she had the Sincere ft affe6lion that a similarity of fentiment could promote ; nor was her generous friendship placed on an undeferving obje^; she had the happinefs of having it returned with additional ardor. To this young lady, who was the daughter of Sir Thomas Hartry, iEmily opened her whole heart* on every occasion, with all the ingenuity of disinterested regard. She had just attained her twentieth year, when an affair, which the reader will foon become acquainted with, gave rife to the following letters from ^mily to her friend.
CHAP. VI.
The fupremest bliSs in life,
Is the kind, the virtuous Wife :
Love’s a Spark of heav’nly flame.
Lent to warm the human frame.
Air in the Opera of Tom Jones.
iEMiLY to Maria.
Albermarle Street.
NO T HIN G but a thorough convidion of my dear friend’s good-nature, and too great knowledge of the mutability of our Sex,
to
A MORAL NOV EL. 25
tt) rally me upon my fudden change, could have induced me to trouble her with this letter.—Oh ! my Maria! must I confefs to you, that with all my boasted indifference, I at length am caught ? at least I think So; and fo will you, when I acknowledge, that I am afraid to afk my heart the question.—However fecure of your friendly counfel in this untried fcene, I will venture to communicate the circumstances as they happened.
The appearance of Garrick in tragedy. Some time ago, induced my uncle at my reqpest, to take places for that evening ; and although he was indifpofed all the morning with a violent head-ach, in fpite of my remonstrances infisted on performing his promife, by attending me to the play in the evening ; fo far does this good man, in every thing, prefer my happinefs to his own eafe. As it was a crouded night, we agreed not to stay the farce, and ordered the carriage accordingly. We had not been long Seated in the box, before Mifs Martin, with whom I have a flight acquaintance, stated her-stlf behind us, being attended by her brother, a young gentleman of fmall private fortune, who has this winter been called to the bar, where he promises to make a figure : but although no one applies more clostly to his profession, when out of it, he is quite the gentleman, which character very few know, how fo well to unite with the man of buSinefs. Finding I was no strang-VoL. I.	B	er
26 AMORAL NOVEL.
«r to his Sister, from his first entrance, he dire<3:-ed his conversation particularly to me ; but being the only woman in company, except her, (and sisters, you know, are nobody) I only thought it what every man would have done in the fame cafe, and therefore, at that time, considered it in n© other light than as common civility. Our difcourfe naturally turning upon the exhibition before us, the justice of his remarks added to the apparent diffidence with which they were uttered, gave me as high an opinion of his judgment as I before had of his addrefs and perfonal behaviour. Added to thefe, he is furnifhed with a mind fufceptible of the most delicate feelings ; for, would you think it, my dear? he was even unfashionable enough to weep at the imaginary reprefentatipn of dif-trefs : as if ashamed of his weaknefs, he for Some time endeavoured to conceal the emotions of his foul ; but in vain : nature got the better of art, and shewed the unaffesiled goodneSs of his heart in its true colours. I do not know whither it was from Sympathy, but I never was more affedied at a tragedy in my life : he perceived it, and I had the fatisfa61ion of being complimented by him on the tendernefs of my passions. Surely this man knows my very thoughts, for he did not once stem to pay the least attention to my perfon : if he has any design upon my affesitions, this is his only way. Your Emmy would hold that man unworthy a place in her heart, who could be captivated by her
perfon
A M O R A L N O V E L. 27 perfon only ; fuch love can have no stability: every day will stiew new beauties to his eyes, each of vrhom will blot the remembrance of the former from his heart; and thus, admiring all, he really regards none. But a man, who prefers us for fome Superior excellence of mind, will, when in postenion of our perfons, have daily opportunities of feeing the improvement of the former ; and thus, with love and reafon both combined, we Spread a toil too dear for him to break. How cautious, then, how very cautious' should we be, not to fix our affeOiions on a man, who probably may abufe the confidence we place in him. When the indissbluable knot is tied, we are no longer preferved under the fostering wing of an indulgent parent; friends and relations, all give up the joint care they have had of our happinefs, and center it alone in the will of a hushand : to him we must on all occasions fly for assistance, which if he refufes, we indeed are miferable.
And yet, my Maria, what hazard, wshat rifque do we not run, in the choice of that man, who is to preside over every future adfion of our lives } for there are a fort of men, who think women made but for their pleafure, as a domef-tic convenience, to rife at their Smiles, or sink at their rebuke ; and then, after fuch behaviour, are amazed to find the delights of matrimony do not anfwer the expediations they have been taught to conceive thereof, and begin to treat B 2	every
28 A M O R A L N O V E L. every idea of connubial love as merely chimericast no where existing but in the luxuriant fancy of youth, ingenuous to create imaginary pleafures ; thus ridiculing the height of human felicity, only becaufe it is a refinemeHt of which their coarfer ideas are not fufceptible. From fuch, kind heaven defend my friend and me!
Although I am not guided by a blind mistaken partiality for my own fex, yet I acknowledge myfelf to' have fo good an opinion of the generality thereof, as to venture to fay, that if their hulhands would treat them with a tendernefs becoming the delicacy of their connexion, and not convert the indulgence of an obliging companion, into the rigid commands of an austere master, or the cold contempt of negligent indifference, they would find in their wives all their fond hearts could wisti, obedient helpmates^ faithful friends, and agreeable companions.
Do not, from what I have above Said, imagine that I am mad enough to think there is nothing required of us in this arduous state; fo far from it, I am convinced that, were we to Spend our whole lives in the confideration of what is proper to be done, there would still be fomething wanting in our condufl, to Supply every duty incumbent on a good wife; and this very circumstance feems defigned by providence, to augment cur felicity ; for if there were no faults, we fhould lofe all that heart-felt fatisfaO;ion arising from a reciprocal forgivement thereof. But above all let
us
A M O R A L N O V E L. 29 us remember, that we should retain the Lover after we become the Wife> and not, when we commence the one, entirely divest ourfelves of the other ; for if we do, how wide ,will be the difference;!—where that tender loftnefs?—where that amiable, engaging compliance, we made ufe of to appear agreeable before marriage ? and as we did it then only perhaps to Satisfy a girlish vanity, how much more studiousty aught we to ufe our most careful assiduity to pleafe, when all our domestic happinefs depends on the firm pof-feffion of our hushand’s affections. Let us therefore, by our wishes, strive to intercept his will: and, according to the maxim in the fong»
While each with tender passion burns,
“ Afcend the throne of rule by turns ;
“ And place (to love, to virtue just)
“ Security in mutual trust.”
The Padlock.
But my zeal for the happinefs of the rest of my fex, has almost made me forget to proceed in my story.
At the conclusion of the play, my uncle went out to enquire after the carriage, promising to return immediately; but after having waited Some time, you may imagine how amazed I was to fee nothing of him, nor could I help expressing my astonishment thereat to Mifs Martin, who, as well as her brother, strove with all the lender B 3	concern
30 A MORAL NOVEL, concern they could to quiet my fears ; but in vain. During the whole time of the entertainment, I was agitated with the most dreadful apprehensions, infomuch that the curtain had dropt Some time before I difeovered it.----In this dil-
emma, Mr. Martin insisted on Setting me down, which, in Such a situation, I could not refuSe ; he therefore handed me into the passage, where the croud was too great for us to proceed, and his eagernefs to extricate us from this difficulty led him fo far, that, by Some accident, a chain-man, in Shifting one of his poles, let it fall upon his head, from whence the blood immediately gufhed in a great quantity. You may more easily imagine, than I can deferibe, the consterna-'tion this threw both his sister and me into, our fears interpreting the danger to be greater than it really was, which, he assured us, was very trifling, and notwithstanding our most earnest entreaties, could not be prevailed on to accept of any assistance till he got home; but turning to his sister, desired stie would lend him her handkerchief, Somebody in the croud having been civil enough to borrow his ; but I being the quicker of the two, (and, I am afraid, almost as much concerned for his Safety) before she could find her’s, had offered him mine, which he politely accepted; and having bound it round his head, with Some difficulty Seated us in the coach.
On our arrival at Albemarle-street, I enquired after my uncle, and had the fatisfadfion of
hearing
A MORAL NOVEL. 31 hearing that he had been taken ill, on the Sudden change from So intenfe heat to cold ; but that, to my heart-felt eafe, he was again recovered, and had arrived just before me.' On hearing this, Mr. Martin begged leave to enquire after his health, the next day ; which I could not re-fufe, but defired that he would not, out of com-plaifance to enquire after the fafety of others, endanger his own, by coming out too foon ; and Intreated he would let me know how he did in the morning ; which having promifed they took their leaves, and left me at liberty to vilit my uncle, who, I found, had no remains of his disorder but a violent head~ach.
Mercy on me ! to what an unconfcionable length have I extended this fubjeSt! but we are apt to dwell on pleafing themes, without considering the leifure or patience of a correspondent. However I think it is now high time for me to conclude, with an assurance of your foon hearing from me again ; and that however I may be employed in the delightful talk of duty and of love, there will always be room left for my Maria, in the heart of her sincerest friend,
^MiLY Summers.
B 4	CHAP.
3a A MORAL NOVEL. CHAP. VII.
To be obliged to compound with my duty! afham’d to look my uncle in the face ! to blusti at his confidence, and be humbled by his kind-nefs! to feel the irkfomenefs of receiving praife, which I am confcious I do not merit! What a state for an ingenuous mind !
The School for Rakes.
M I L Y to Maria.
Albemarle Street.
Agreeable to my promife, I again take up my pen, to proceed in what your vivacity will call a romantic adventure. After parting with Mr. Martin, I went to bed, but without inclination to steep. The compofure I had always hitherto felt, on repairing to rest, was gone, and in its room had left ten thoufand doubts and fears.—According to my custom, upon a stridt examination into my adtions of the day, I found in my heart fenfations which I dared not give way to, nor could totally fupprefs: in fhort, I found my happinefs depended on the actions of a man, who as yet had never, and (what was worfe) who perhaps never intended to Speak to me, on any other footing than that of a common acquaintance. Shall I confefs to you, that this thought affedted me fo far as to hinder me
from
A M O R A L N O V E L. 35 from taking my natural rest ? I therefore rofe in the morning, pale and unrefrelhed, my ufual fprightlinefs Supplanted by a melancholy dejection, almost too much for me to bear. My uncle immediately percived it, and, with a paternal kindnefs, tenderly enquired the caufe. To ac-knbwledge the real one was impossible ; the tious confession of having been troubled with the tooth-ach all night, delivered me from that confusion which his question had thrown me into ; but you may imagine that I did not feel much easier, when, after a moment’s recolleQ;ion, my conscience dictated to me, to what the entertainment of an imprudent passion had reduced your friend ; the wilful deception of a man fo kind, fo generous, that hitherto he had always strove to intercept my wisties, that I might never know what it was to alk a favour.—--Oh ! my Maria !—to what does this love fubjeft us! how far does it debafe the generosity of our minds beneath its glorious Sphere !—At our births, by nature we are open, ingenuous, and sincere ; our youthful hearts can entertain no thought, no wilh, which we desire to exclude the breast of any one acquaintance.
1 was meditating on the fallacious influence of unauthorized concealed love, when, according to my expeQiation, the Servant announced Mr. Martin’s approach. This found at once roufed me from my reveries, and gave me Spirits to receive him in as diSengaged a man-B 5	ne^
34 A MORAL NOVEL.
ner as the nature of our acquaintance would admit of. I was forry to obferve, that his drefs (considering the time of day) was studioufly elegant. I am afraid he has either too much of the coxcomb in him, or a worfe opinion of my understanding than I could wisti; as his appearance Seemed to indicate, that he thinks me capable of receiving an impresiion from his exterior parts. From your thorough knowledge of my heart, you best can tell how much he is mistaken : and here, methinks, you will call me a whimsical girl, for troubling my head So much about a man, whom as yet I had never Seen but once.—Why, that indeed is very true ; but in that once, his eyes as plainly Spoke the language of his foul, as if be had told me that he loved ; for, in his whole behaviour, there was a delicate attention to my every word, which was more perfuasive eloquence than any he could ufe.
Some few compliments had pasted between us, when ray uncle entered the room, to whom I introduced Mr. Martin, as the gentleman to whom 1 was fo much obliged for his astistance the preceding evening. With his ufual politenefs, he made him many acknowledgments for his behaviour, and, in a short time, infensibly fell into a converlation, which Seemed to promife an intimacy ; nor was I mistaken in my eonjedlures; a general invitation to Albemarle-street was the confequenee, at, which, 1 wistconifeSs, I was not
a little
A MORAL NOVEL. 55
a little pleafed ; and, in order to strengthen this growing connexion, I fent by him a message to his sister, intimating that I Ihould be proud of a stricter acquaintance with her: after which he took his leave, not without first having made a very significant bow to me ;—at least my vanity construed it as fuch.
You may imagine he did not neglefi: the invitation he had received : few days passed in which we did not fee him ; and my uncle in a stiort time conceived fo cordial a fondnefs for |him, that he Scarcely ever Seemed to have enough of ' his company; he was one in all our parties at home, and attended us to every public place; and though he did not pay me the common compliments which most of his fex ufe to our’s, still there was a certain delicacy in every word, which too plainly assured me, that he regarded me with other eyes than thofe of a mere acquaintance and I will acknowledge, that 1 daily expedled a declaration of his passion, nay, that I even wisti’d * it, though I was not without my fears, lest my uncle,, on account of the fmalinefs of his fortune, fliould oppofe his inclinations, and thereby deprive me of his company, which I now enjoyed with unlimited pleafure.-~Oh ! my Maria I— what did I not fuffer from this apprehensson !—« and. as he grew every day nnsor^ particular, every time I faw him increafed my uneafinefs, till at ‘ length, what I fo long expelled, arrived : but I am furamoiied. to my toiler, and therefore must
make
36 A M ORAL NOVEL, make this the fubje61: of another letter. Adieu ! —on whomever I may bestow my affeffions, you still shall have your share in the heart of
Your’s, most stncerely,
.®MiLY Summers.
CHAP. VIII.
Conceit, more rich in matter than in words. Brags of his Substance, not of ornament;
They are but beggars that can count their worth: But my true love is grown to fuch excefs,
1 caniiot Sum up one half of my wealth.
Romeo and Juliet.
i^lMiLY to Maria.
Albemarle Street.
WHEN once affedfion is rooted in the breast, hard is the talk to conceal the movements of our hearts from the dear objedf. 1 thus (my amiable friend) begin with a Sentiment, becauSe I think the Sequel of my story V- will pretty clearly exemplify it: I will therefore fiO-w reSume the thread of my diScourfe, and endeavour to be a little more consistent than in my last; but as I was at that time in an unufual
stutter
A MORAL NOVEL. 37
flutter of Spirits, I am Sure you will pardon me.
The morning preceding to my writing it, I was lolling negligently on a Settee, perufing your letter, when Mr. Martin, entering the room Suddenly, unheard and unexpefted, threw me into Some little confufion, and in my hurry I dropt your epistle on the floor, which, if you remember, was dire6ted by your father: he immediately picked it up, and perceived the Superscription to be a man’s hand ; after a short filence, during which various pashons by turns appeared in his face, “ How happy. Madam, (Said he) “ must that gentleman be, who can So far have “ acquired your esteem, as to be permitted to “correspond with you!”—Having So Said, he held it in his hand, as if waiting for an anSwer ; but as I perceived a taint of jealouSy in his words and mode of expreshon, I endeavoured to evade the circumstance, by enquiring when I might hope to congratulate him upon a perfe6k recovery from the accident he met at the theatre, which still clouded his countenance with a patch ? Seeing through my artifice, he anfwered as follows: “ You Seem, MiSs Summers, to be extremely “ cautions of faying any thing further on the
letterand, with a kind of forced irony, added, “ I am Sure MiSs Summers’s principles “ would never Suffer her to hold a correSppn-“ dence with any one of whom she need be ** ashamed.”'—Notwithstanding the fatisfadlioji
I at
38 A MORAL NOVEL.
I at that moment felt, for having awakened th« refentment of that love I wilhed to cultivate, to Support the farce, I could not avoid replying, with an air of negligence, “ I do not think my-« Self obliged to confult all my acquaintances on the choice of my correfpondents; and, pro-« vided 1 have none with whom my uncle is dif-« pleafed, I do not fee that any other perfon has ** any concern in the affair.”^—Poor foul | how engagingly simple he looked !—*he hung his head, and, with a timid hesitating inferiority, faid. To be Sure, Madam—»as you fay—I have no right—I once, indeed, padded he with a sigh) “ flattered myfelf—but, fool that I was,—what reafon had I to. expert—■—” (then with a low bow continued) “ but as I acknowledge my tranf-“ greflion, and sineerely beg your pardon, I hope « Mtfs Summers will for once excufe fo imperti-** nent a curiosity ; efpecially as in palliation thereof, I can with truth assure her, that I;
« had forae reafon for my Seeming enquiry.-
X Well, (Said I) since you con-fefe your fault, I will now convince you, that your fufpicions ** were groundlefsbut obferve—I do this to justify myfelf, not to Satisfy you.”—So Saying, I produced the letter, and relating to him the real truth, Shewed him your name at the bottom; at the sight of which, his countenance immediately brightened up ; and I will own to you, that I felt an unSpeakable pleafure, when I Saw him, under a pretence of a cloSer examination of the direfition, prefsmy name to his lips with the
greatest
A MORAL NOVEL. 39
greatest eagernefs ; after which he returned me the letter, with as much compofure as if he was convinced I had not taken notice of his last a6lion.
The conversation now dropp’d ; but this being far from my intention (I am afraid out of a Secret desire of urging him to a declaration), imrne-diately took an opportunity of faying, “ I think “ Sir you told me, that you had a reafon for your “ Seeming enquiry concerning the letter ; Shall I “ not come under the predicament of unreafon-“ able curiosity by desiring to know what it was ?” —By no means, replied he,, as you are the only perfon interested in it, you have an un-“ doubted right to be acquainted therewith ; par-don me then, dear Mifs Summers, but my “ own happinefs was at stake.”—“ Nay, now “ (Said I) I don’t understand you.”—« Say ra-“ ther (reply’d he, with Some emotion) you “ won’t understand me ; and indeed I don’t “ know whether I stould wisti you, nor would « I ever have informed you of it, but that I find, notwithstanding all my endeavours, it will be « impossible long to conceal it from you ; in juf-« tisication therefore of my own behaviour, « (which I am Sensible must have appear’d very extraordinary) I am under an abfolute necessity of declaring, that from the first moment which “ I Saw, I lov’d you.”—Oh, my Maria !—what contradictory creatures are we women altho’ this declaration was my ultimate wish, and. tho’
it
40 AMORAL NOVEL, it was what I had fo long expected, would you believe, that when the wifh’d for moment was arrived, I could Scarce Support mySelS from fainting. Perceiving therefore that I heSitated for an anfwer (for indeed I knew not what to fay), he took one of my hands, and with Some warmth cry’d, “ May I not, dearest Mifs Summers, ** hope that by my earnest endeavours to pleafe, “ I may at length render myfelf not totally dif-agreeable to you.”—And much more he then faid than I can now remember: it is impostible to defcribe the dilemma I was in ; and, to con-fefs the truth, the moment was not a little critical.—A fine young fellow at my feet, using all the rhetoric he was master of, to perfuade me to what before I had no Small inclination, (I mean the avowal of my passion) was a dangerous situation :—Tell me, my Maria, was this a time for hesitation ?—Trust me—No—-And I really think that I had great prudence in avoiding a prefent return of his profelSions; which I did by faying, It has always been my constant rule, and always « Ihall be. Sir, never to listen to any one on this « fubjefit, till I have my uncle’s fandion for fo doing; it is to him therefore you must apply.”— « By your referring me to Sir Harry, Madam (re-plied he) I flatter myfelf that if I have his per-mission for the attempt, I may one day ipfpire « you with Sentiments of tendernefs.”—Was not
that pretty forward my dear ?-However I was
determined to punisti him for his prefumption ; therefore with all the confequence I could then
assume,.
A MORAL NOVEL. 41 assume, I replied, “ You have drawn, Sir, a conclusion in your own favour which might as “ eaSily be turn’d to your disadvantage ; I mean, that you might take my reference of you to my “ uncle for an abfolute denial; as I think, you may be pretty well convinced, that he will “ never be induced to give you his confent.”— “ I understand you. Madam, laid he, the dif-“ ference of our fortunes and expediations ; but “ I have too good an opinion of your generosity “ to think that alone could influence you, what-“ ever it might Sir Harry ; for which reafon I “ rather cbofe to apply to you first, being con-“ vinced that were I to meet with encourage-** ment from you, he would never withhold his, “ in a point where your happinefs was fo nearly “ concerned.” My anfwer to this came of courfe. Your only way. Sir, to gain mine is, to fay no more on this fubjedi, till after your appli-cation to him ; however of this you may be “ assured, that as I am almost convinced he will never interpofe in an affair of this kind, Ib ‘‘ have I too much honour to give any perfon a “ double trouble where one will fuffice.” Was this faying too much ?—However, whether it was or not, he understood my meaning well; for kiffing my hand with the greatest tendernefs, “ My kindest vEmily,” burst fpontaneousty from his lips ; and fo he left me to follow my instructions with regard to my uncle.—And now my friend, I alk your advice how to afi, in cafe he should oppofe my wishes ; as be shat as it may,
I am
42 A MORAL NOVEL.
I am fure it will be impollible to hide the movements of my heart from him, who has gained So entire poffeffion of it; but in your counfel talk not of impossibilities ; and if you have never felt th'e influence of a tender impartiality, conSider the difficulty of erassng one when it is firmly rooted in the heart.—Adieu, strain every power to assist with your advice.
Your dearest friend,
iE. Summer's.
M I L Y to Maria.
Albemarle Street.
O H ! my Maria, give me joy ; I am happy, happy beyond expression ; he is mine, fast as the powers of love and promife can enfure him;— oh, the extatic minute when; after long restraint the hearts of lovers congenial Spring to meet each other !—Sir Harry yesterday informed, me that he had received propofals from Mr. Martin, “ of what nature (added he with a Smile) I be-« lieve you are not ignorant; I therefore defire to know of you what anfwer I am to give him —Your prudence, Sir, (Said 1) will always di-« reO: you to what is best.”'—“ That’s not the cafe, (replied he) put prudence out of the question, then tell me, could you love him as “ a wife ?—if you can, he is yours; and tho* ** your fortunes will not be large enough to fup-“ ply the luxurious Superfluities of life, it shall
be
A MORAL NOVEL. 43
** be made fufficient to render two worthy people ** happy ; and you still may have Something to ** Spare for the neceflities of a deferving friend, or a pitiable objedi ; and in this life what more ** can be destred ?” In Ihort, in the afternoon I received a visit from Mr. Martin, and my uncle joining our hands, expressed his approbation of the union ; at the fame time, with a benignant Smile, imploring Heaven to shower down prosperity upon our heads.—I was thus, you fee, obliged to promife, that in due time 1 would, by completing Mr. Martin’s happinefs, render my own fo too.—Would you were here to share in my felicity!—for at prefent my joy is almost too great to bear with moderation. Adieu; a tumultuous heart ill can furnish matter for a long epistle ; excufe therefore any more from
Your overjoy’d JE. Summers.
*** Though thefe letters are thus placed in immediate Succession, that the thread of the narrative might not be interrupted, the reader will no doubt obferve, that Some time intervened between the writing of each.
CHAP.
44 A MORAL NOVEL.
CHAP. IX.
Mighty Pan I with tender care View this Swain and virgin fair;
May they ever thus impart Just return of heart for heart!
May the pledges of their blifs Climb their knees to (hare the kifs!
May their steady blooming youth.
While they tread the paths of truth.
Virtues catch from either fide.
From the bridegroom and the bride I
Lloyd’s Arcadia, a Dramatic Pastoral. Maria to ^Emily.
INDEED, indeed, my dearest iEmily, theres’s no bearing this: you are pofitively a horrid provoking girl: one minute you alk my my advice, and the next comes a letter, inform-r ing me that you have followed your own inclina-naiions, without waiting for my counfel: thus are all the fine things, w^hich I had treafured up to perfuade you to conquer your pastlon, thrown away, and rendered ufelefs, by your precipitate conduct. Being determined to give you fome assistance, as I cannot addrefs myfelf to you after the manner I at first intended, I will endeavour
t9
A MORAL NOVEL. 45
to lay you down fome rules for the married state, ■which I hope will not be totally ufelefs.
Seriousty then, as my iEmily has always hitherto dignified me with the name of Friend, I Should ill deferve that title, were I to be Silent at a time when all her acquaintances will foon be pouring in their congratulations, on what may justly be called, the moji important event of her life. At a time like this, when your heart is replete with joy, I am afraid you will Scarce have leifure to attend a tedious homily of grave fen-timents. Sincerity is the truest test of friend-fhip, and, though uncourtly, when well meant claims a favourable reception: the physician who administers medicines which may be dif-agreeable, and the furgeon who probes a wound, as they acSt upon Salutary principles, ought rather to be thanked than blamed, for the essential pain their endeavours occasion.
First then, let me intreat you to consider fe-riousty the Solemn nature of the engagement into which you are going to enter; and as you have often, to feed a foolish vanity. Spent whole days in the choice of a new gown, or a fet of ribbands; how much more attentively should you consider that general conduff, which is to enfure your happinefs, or mifery !
But as a preacher in petticoats is rather intolerable, though my papa fays there are many old
women
46 A MORAL NOVEL.
women mount pulpits, I (hall not endeavour to prejudice you against the mairimonial voyage you are about to take, by picturing the many hazards and perils which often attend it.—Be neat in apparel, cordial in behaviour, flow to find, and ready to forgive, faults j cautious of hearing that dangerous flattery beauty like your’s may produce ; follow fafliion, without worshipping fo vain an idol; indulge agreeable, harmlefg Society; preferve natural charms by a regular life, without paltry aids of art; Support Spirit according to your income, with that commendable oeconomy which casts at distance parSimoni-ous penury; in short, my dear iEmily, strive to make home agreeable, and, with the accomplishments you are mistrefs of, if your hushand wanders, he must be the most ungrateful, infen-fible, or vicious wretch living.
' That I may not interrupt that pleastng flow of ideas, and that lovely profpefl of expectation, may they prove real and permanent, which now brighten your mind! Allow me to hasten a conclusion, and to wish that Some remembrance of me may ever find Some corner in my dear Emmy’s delicate affedion.
Your’s, in all degrees of
sincere cordiality, Maria Hartry.
Maria
A MORAL NOVEL. 47
Maria to ^^Imily.
Oak-hall,
YOU cannot imagine, my dearest .®mily, how much your last letter * has Surprized me ; nor are you So explicit as I could wisti: you only tell me, that an unexpe6ted bufiuefs requires your uncle’s immediate attendance in Ireland, and that he has deSired you to postpone your marriage till after his return; thus leaving me to gueSs at all the other circumstances: however, I hope that his buSinefs, (whatever it be) will not detain him long ; and if So, I will fairly confefs, that I am not forry for it, for two reafons; first, becaufe to learn how to fet a just value on profperity, we Ihould feel the frown* of disappointment; So this flight misfortune will inure you to the patient toleration of greater, fliould they ever arrive : the other cauSe of my joy at this event is, that it will give me the pleasure of your company, as I must in fist on having you at Oak-hall during your uncle’s abSence: bring Mr. Martin with you, and let us make a partib quarree ; who the fourth perSon is to be, I will inform you when I can do it in perSon.— Oh ! my iEmily, I have much to fay to you, more than I can poflibly croud into the limits of this letter : I will therefore make no other apology for leaving you in Some doubt, than my
* This letter does not appear.
eager
k
4S A MORAL NOVEL.
eager defire of feeing you with all convenient Speed. Come Soon, I request, and glad the heart of
Your’s, most affeftionately,
Maria Hartry.
CHAP. X.
IN confequence of the foregoing Letter, ;ffimily foon fet out for Oak-hall; though not without Some Small regret, as Mr. Martin’s attendance at Westminster necessarily prevented him from accompanying her ; but as Maria will now begin to make no Small figure in this history, it may be right to give my readers Some further account of this young lady, as well as of her parents: in order to do which properly, I must begin at an earlier period than that to which I have reduced my story.	|
Sir Thomas Hartry was a baronet possested of a large estate in the country where he refided ; which he inherited from a long train of ancestors, who were all rendered remarkable by their extreme avarice: and though he did not possefs this (hocking contraction of heart in fo great a degree, still he did not totally degenerate from the maxim of his illustrious forefathers. “ Get “ money,” was his favourite principle ; and indeed this Seemed to be the aim of all his actions ;
A MORAL NOVEL. 49
tions; notwithstanding which, he was by no means totally callous to the feelings of humanity; for, what was most extraordinary, he could feel for the distresses of others; though he feemed deaf to almost the common calls of necessity for himfelf. Ever constant to his favourite notions, he married lady Hartry for two reafons ; the one, becaufe stie had ten thoufand pounds ; the other, in hopes of having an heir to his estate : and as this was almost his ultimate wisti, one would imagine he must be completely happy, to find himfelf indulged with fuch a blessing, about a year after his marriage ; and fuch a one, who as he grew up, became the admiration of the whole country, for his fenfe and good nature : in stiort, he feemed entirely clear’d from his father’s faults, and to inherit the virtues only of both his parents: yet, fuch is the unaccountable caprice of human nature, that though he was fo deferving a fon, as almost to exceed defcription, he never was a favourite with his father; who, notwithstanding, could assign no reafon for his distike. Charles (that was his name), beheld it with concern, and endeavoured to gain his affections by his assiduity; but this, instead of being taken in the favourable light, ferved only to heighten his father’s difgust: in stiort, nothing could pleafe him, and he at last drove him, by a courfe of ill ufage, at the age of eighteen, to feek that happinefs among strangers, which he could not find among his nearest relations. But behold the amazing caprice of mankind ! who never know how to Set a just' VoL. I.	C	value
50 A. MORAL NOVEL, value on a jewel till ’tis gone; that we cannot know how much we love, or what it is to want a friend, till we have lost him, was never more strongly verified than in this instance of Sir Thomas Hartry ; who, till this moment, never was aware of the real affeftion w'hich he had for his Son; his virtues now appeared with double force to the afflidted father, who in vain ufed all postlble means to recover him; and when he found that he was gone for ever, all the tender parent rifing into his eyes, quite abforb’d the man ; and he for fome time gave way to that Soft Sorrow’, which overpowered his breast, and which he could not fupprefs.
So Severe a blow had nearly been too much for Lady Hartry, who almost doated on her fon, regarding him with thofe innate feelings which mothers only can be truly judges of. Time, how'ever, that great restorer of all things, in fome meafure alleviated the grief of both Sir Thomas and his lady; the former of whom, with the lofs of his fon, Seemed totally to have abandoned his pastion for money, and determined to make up in kindnefs what the fon had wanted, to his daughter Maria, who being about ten years old when the above affair happened, could not, of courfe, be fuppofed to feel much afflidfion for the lofs of her brother: —all that she could, she did.—As she might now be reckoned an only child, no trouble, no txpence, was Spared in the education of this
darling
A MORAL NOVEL. 51 darling of the family: and her fond parents were overjoyed to find their trouble and attention So well repaid, as to behold her, at the age of eighteen, posteffed of every natural as well as acquired perfection, necessary to complete the accomplilhed lady: her perSon was handfome to excels, rather fhort than otherwife ; her carriage was eafy and genteel without affeCtation ;
Her breath difclos’d the Sweets of Spring ;
And if for Summer you would Seek,
’Twas painted in her eye, her cheek.”
The goodneSs of her understanding has been made Sufficiently apparent to the reader by her letter, before inferted, to ^mily, on the fubje^ of her marriage. So happy in natural and ac-. quired perfections, no wonder stie was the delight of her parents, and the admiration of all who knew her.
CHAP. XI.
>	" " »»■ But come what forrov/ can.
It cannot countervail th’ exchange of joy That one short minute gives me, in her fight.
Romeo and Juliet.
MARIA Hartry was propofed as a just pattern for all the young ladies in the C 2	country.
52 A M O R A L N O V E L.
country. No young man could See her without loving; nor was there any father but what courted, and would have been proud of, her alliance. Yet, amidst the many admirers that She .gained, the many compliments which were paid her, and though furrounded by the whole artillery of love ; no gallant could ye^ boast of having received more encouragement from her than was becoming an acquaintance, for as Such only did (he regard all who had offered her their Services: notwithstanding which, as I pro-fefs myfelf to be a faithful historian, I must con-fefs, that She could not call her heart her own, it having long Since, in her private determination, been bestowed on a neighbouring gentle-tleman, whofe, name was Melvill; though he was ignorant of his good fortune in the poffeffion of fo inestimable a treafure ; not that he was blind to the united charms of perfpn and understanding, which fo apparently Shone forth in Maria, but becaufe his diffidence prevented him -from affuring himfelf of that fuccefs, which only -depended on his alking her the question.
I will not pay fo bad a compliment to that young gentleman’s understanding as to fay, he was the handfomest man nature ever formed ; let it fuffice to assure my readers, that Sne had been far from deficient in adorning ium with perfonal qualifications, to which his politenefs gave an additional lustre ; his father dying whilst he was yet young, left him heir to a very large
estate ;
A MORAL NOVEL. 53 estate ; on this provifo, that he Ihould not come into the pofiestlon thereof, till he attained the age of twenty-five years: a right, which though not allowed of, either by nature or justice, many parents thus assume, by prolonging the minority of their children. As he lived with his guardian, in the neighbourhood of Sir Thomas Hartry, he of courfe was intimate with that gentleman, and from his frequent vifits at Oak-hall, had drank deep of the delicious poifon of love before he knew by what name to stile his regard ; recollefition of the pleafure which he always found in Maria’s company, too foon, alas ! convinced him of the true reafon, and he Several times determined to inform her thereof; but fuch is the modesty attendant on unfeigned love, that, notwithstanding the various opportunities he had, his fear overcame his regard, and prevented his beginning the only fubjedl on which he wissi’d to talk ; but ’tis not the tongue alone, that can declare our passion ; no, our eyes pronounce it, and every adlion fpeaks what though he never told her that he lov’d ; his whole behaviour ssiew’d it; it was apparent to every eye ; nor could Maria any longer be blind, to w'hat ssie fo earnestly wisti’d to be true.
She faw it with pleafure ; and thus Melvill had a more powerful advocate in her breast, than he even dared to hope : thus Situated, ssie ’ daily expeded a declaration, and as often was C 3	difap-
54 A M O R A L N O V E L. difappointed; for tho’ her behaviour gave him every encouragement the nature of their con-ne^Iion would admit of, he could not So far overcome the natural timid refpeft of his Soul. Under thefe almoft infupportable torments, his health, from inward grief. Sensibly declined; his life became burthenfome and tedious ; he never was eafy one minute when out of her prefence, and, at the fame time, was racked with the most tormenting fears of losing her for ever: In this unhappy state did he for Some lime live, till no longer able to endure it, he determined to acquaint her with his inviolable attachment, and hope the best. When we have form’d any fav’rite Scheme, it is an eafy matter to find an opportunity of putting it into execution ; thus as Melvill had formed a design, on the fuccefs of which, all the happinefs of his future life depended, he burnt with the most eager impatience to be delivered from fo painful an uncertainty ; and as very few days pasted in which he was not at Oak-hall, he foon found the fo much wilhed for opportunity.
One very warm day, after having dined there, Maria propofed a walk in the grove, which her parents immediately assented to, faying that they would follow her; thus luckily leaving our young couple together, at which Maria was not a little pleafed, Melvill having previoussy informed her, that when a proper time offered, he could wisti to have Some conversation with her :
therefore
A MORAL NOVEL. 55
therefore joyfully leaving her parents to follow them, she fet out with Melvill, almost dying with curiosity to know what he had to communicate.
She wished it might be what she fufpe6ted; though at the Same time she v/as not totally devoid of fear lest it should, not being provided with a fuitable anfwer thereto : from thefe considerations therefore, her mind was far from being the most tranquil, Confcious of his intentions, Melvill was not in a very enviable situation, and trembled fo violently, that had she not been as much agitated, it could never have efcaped her notice : however, by both being equally concerned, they neither of them perceived it in the other, and thus walked without uttering a Syllable, till they arrived at a bench in the grove, where they fat down, both still preferving the exaftest silence ; many attempts, indeed, to Speak, were made on both sides, but nothing more than—Sir—and Madam——7 beg your pardon------1 thought you
—*and Such incoherent Sentences pasted, till, after Some hesitation, Maria took courage enough to alk, what businefs Mr. Melvill could have with her ?—to which he returned no anfwer, and put her to. the painful neceffity of repeating the question ; when no longer able to restrain his paffion, he dropt on one knee, and Seizing her hand, cried, ‘‘ Can you, Lovely
Maria, even appear to be ignortvnt of what C 4	“I have
56 A M ORAL NOVEL.
‘‘ I have to fay ? — Who can be permitted to “ converfe with you, without involuntarily lov-“ ing you ? — Can you be miftrefs of thofe “ charms, and wonder at my paffion ?—— Yes, dearest angel, I love you with the most ardent “ affeftion; ' but could I have divin’d, that a declaration thereof would have fo far offended “ you, (as by your countenance I fee you now are) my lips for ever Should have been clofed, and I would have carried the Secret to my early grave. What vanity could induce me “ to hope your kind notice, with fo Small a Share “ of attradbon and merit to recommend me ?— “ But do not, dear Maria, do not hate me ; “ though you cannot love, do not defpife me.” Defpife you !—no, Mr. Melvill, heaven “ forbid I Should defpife any one !—But pray, “ Sir, rifeyou distrefs me—indeed you do.”
-----(f I did not mean it, (replied he :) I would
Sooner die, than give you one moment’s un-“ eaSinefs:—but will you then thus rejedt me for ever ?—Oh ! do not look with Such chil-“ ling indifference : allow me to hope, without trefpaffmg the bounds of delicacy, one favour-
“ able expreffion.”---—What would you
have me fay ?”—“ Only that I am not quite
‘‘ indifferent to you, not hateful.”--You
“ are indeed. Sir, (replied fhe. Sighing) far
“ from it.”-----“ And is it possible, (returned
“ Melvill) that Maria can think tenderly of
me ?”-----Soft, no more:—here are my
« father and mother.”-----“ But may I then be
« permitted
A MORAL NOVEL. 57
permitted (fays the impatient lover) to impart
my further Sentiments by letter --‘‘ Any
“ thing, if you will now be Silent ; another time ‘‘ I’ll hear you, or from you.”
The arrival of Sir Thomas and Lady Hartry put an end to the conversation for this time. The difcourfe turned on indifferent topics, and our young couple parted much better pleafed with each other than when they met; Maria, to find that file had not placed her affedbons on a fenfelefs and unworthy objedt; and Melvill, that he had gained a kind of permiffion to write to her, which he determined to do immediately on his return home.
CHAP. XII.
T"o mourn a mifchief that is past and gone,
Is the next way to draw new mifchief on ;
The robb’d that fmiles, steals fomething from the thief;
He robs himfelf, that Spends a bootlefs grief.
Othello.
Before I proceed any farther, I must beg leave to introduce to my readers. Some new acquaintances, I mean the family of Mr. Howard, Melvill’s guardian ; which indeed was not large, as it conSisted only of himfelf, his O 5	daughter
58 A MORAL NOVEL.
daughter Charlotte, and his ward. This gentleman had formerly been in a capital bufinefs in London ; during which time, he had contra(9;ed an intimacy with Melvill’s father ; who, from his candour and just dealing, conceived fo good an opinion of him, as at his death to appoint him Sole guardian to his fon.
On the lofs of his wife, he retired with his daughter, who was then an infant, to the Small estate where he now restded, to enjoy the downhill of his life, far from the noify bustling of that world, the major part of which he was convinced, made fraud their only study, and money their almost foie purfuit: although his rank in life was not equal to that of Sir Thomas Hartry, nevertheless a great intimacy fu-bSisted between the two families; and Charles Brarfry and Charlotte being play-fellows when young, conceived for each other a cordial and unfeigned friendfhip, which as they grew up, ripening into mutual love, in their inadvertent youth they readily gave way to it; but when the pleaf-ing fondnefs in forhe meafure was fubSided into a fettled passion, and reafon had recovered her lost fway, Charles began feriousty to consider, that On account of their inequality of fortunes, it would be impossible ever to make his father agree to the match ; and, as he had too much feal love for poor Charlotte to think of involving her in certain distrefs, by a clandestine marriage, he had no other refoerse left, than the aforementioned
A MORAL NOVEL. 59 mentioned manner of leaving Oak-hall; flattering himSelf, that abfence would eflPace the remembrance of what he dared not cherlfh in his breast ; nor would he venture to take leave of this darling of his heart, lest her prefence and arguments Should shake the firm refolve which he had made. After his departure, and not till then, would he inform her of his reafons for this step, which he did by letter; and although she Saw the justnefs and propriety thereof, in their full force, his abfence could not fail of being a heavy caufe of grief to her; however, as refignation was the only medicine which could restore her peace, she patiently Submitted to her misfortunes ; though being destitute of a friend, to whom she might relate the story of her woe, she could not, forbear Sometimes in private, paying to his memory the tribute of a tear; till as Maria grew up, they form’d an intimacy, which, from a Similarity of Sentiments, was foon converted into friendship ; and Charlotte had the fatisfadtion of unburthening her heart of the load under which it laboured, to that perSon from whom she was fure to meet the generous return of compaflion : nor was her confidence mifplac-ed ! Maria faw, and pitied her misfortunes; and by being frequently with her, kindly endeavoured to difpel that gloom which hung upon her countenance, whilst alone. Melvill therefore knowing the friendly connedtion which Subsisted between them, determined, thro’ Charlotte’s means, to get a letter conveyed to Maria; and accord-
ingly>
6o A MORAL N O V E I., ingly, on his return to Mr. Howard’s, informed her of what, from his behaviour, fhe must have been blind not to have perceived before ; at the fame time defiring her astistance therein, knowing what it was to love, and pitying the pangs of barr’d astedtions, fhe promifed him all the help in her power ; and as an earnest of future fer-vices, to convey a letter the next morning to Oak-hall, upon which he immediately wrote as follows :
To Mifs Hart ry.
Dear Madam,
In what words fhall I exprefs my Sorrow, for the pain that my yesterday’s behaviour gave you? If I then faid any thing to incur your difpleafure, or really offend you, I hope you will have good-nefs enough to attribute it to the violence of a passion, which no time can alter or abate : and Gonssder, that I declared it to you, before I could have an opportunity to weigh the confe-quences of fuch behaviour, that my mind was fo replete with the idea of your perfe<Stions, I was not master of myfelf; that the time, the place, the opportunity, all confpired to hurry me on to that adt, by which I have incurred your dif-pleafure. If you will generousty recollefl all ihefe, I flatter myfelf your goodnefs of heart is fuch, that you Vvill readily forgive me: for be affured, that could I have forefeen any difpleafure, or p.ainful anxiety, on your side, nothing
' Should
A MORAL NOVEL. 6i should have forced the painful Secret from me.
‘ However, Since I have once had the prefumption to entertain a thought of you, give me leave again to throw myfelf at your feet, and declare, what I hope you will believe me Sincere in, that I love you almost to distraO;ion.—Oh ! dearest Maria, if you cannot regard me with a favourable eye, at least pity the fufferings of
Your devoted admirer,
Henry Melvill.
The above letter Charlotte dispatched under a cover to her friend, and Melvill waited the return of the meffenger with the greatest anxiety ; however, thinking him unufually tedious, (for lovers ever run before the clock) in order to amufe himfelf, he took up his favourite author*, when the following lines imipediately caught his eye, which he thought fo applicable to himfelf, that he could not forbear repeating them two or three times aloud :
Blest be the man, his memory at least,
Who found the art thus to untold his breast ; And taught fucceeding times an eafy way. Their Secret thoughts by letters to convey ;
To baffle abfence, and Secure delight,
Which, till that time, was limited to stght:
* The Guardian.
The
62 A M O R A L N O V E L.
The parting farewel Spoke the last adieu ;
The lefs’ning distance past, then lofs of view ; The friend was gone, which Some kind moments gave,
And abSence Separated, like the grave.
When for a wife the youthful patriarch Sent, The camels, jewels, and the steward, went; The wealthy equipage, tho’ grave and stow; But not a line, which might the lover shew. The rings and bracelets woo’d her hands and arms ;
But, had she known of melting words, the charms
That under Secret Seals in ambush lie,
To catch the Soul when drawn into the eye ;
The fair Assyrian had not took his guide.
Nor her Soft heart in chains of pearl been ty’d.
I
CHAP.
I
A MORAL NOVEL. 63 CHAP. XIII.
■	... — If I were now to die,
■’Twere now to be most happy; for I fear.
My foul hath her content fo abfolute,
That not another comfort, like to this,
Succeeds in unknown fate.
Othello.
MELVILL was amuSing himfelf after the manner mentioned at the conclusion of my last chapter, when Charlotte entered the room with a letter, which having given him, stie, fmilling, retired : but the joy that he had conceived, at the receipt of an epistle from Maria, was quickly converted into the most poignant grief, when, on opening it, he read only the following words :
‘‘ Sir,
“ Since I last faw you, an affair has happen-“ ed, of which I cannot conveniently inform you by letter. If you have the regard which you ‘‘ profefs for me, you will find Some immediate ‘‘ opportunity of feeing
The afflidled
“ Ma^ia Hartry.”
On
64 A M O R A L N O V E L.
On reading this extraordinary note, our hero was little better than one mad : his mind was agitated with the most perplexing doubts and fears ; and in this agony did he fet out for Oak-hall, without giving any anfwer to the repeated questions of Mifs Howard, who had no Small reafon to be Surprized at his behaviour ; nor indeed could Ihe form any conjecture of the caufe, ’till, just as he M^as Setting out, throwing her Maria’s note, he cried, “ Madam, read that;
“ —then wonder, if you can, that I am distraCt-ed.
On his arrival at Sir Thomas Hartry’s he found that both he and my lady were out, but that Maria had walked into the grove ; thither he Irastened with all the impetuofity of a lover, and found her on the Same bench, where, but the preceding day he had diSclofed his love; he found her, ’tis true;-—but, oh heart-piercing Sight! with one hand She was Supporting her head, and with the other. She wiped av/ay the tears, which fell in torrents from her lovely eyes.
—She was So lost in thought, that he got pretty near before She perceived him ; but when the rustling of the leaves drew her attention thatway> starting up, with eager tranfports. She cry’d,
‘‘ Oh ! Mr. Melvill, is it you “ 1 am glad you are come.”—Then Smiling through her tears. She added “ Have 1 not overstepp’d the bounds of modesty, in thus deSiringto See you?”
—« Tell me, my dear Maria, (Said he) tell me,
“ what
I
A MORAL NOVEL. 95 what is it that effects you, inform me, I befeech you ; what can be the caufe of that uneafmefs “ which I fee fo strongly printed on your coun-“ tenance “ You were no Sooner (anfwered Ihe) departed yesterday, than my father in-“ form’d me, that he was just come from Sir To-“ by Clunch, w'ho had been to make a propofal “ for an alliance of the two families, by his Son’s “ marriage with me ; and, to my Sorrow, he “ was fo thoroughly refolved upon it, that it was in vain I pleaded my distike to Mr. ‘‘ Clunch ; he who has hitherto been fo indul-gent a parent, nor ever offered to force my in-“ clinations in an affair of this nature, has inSist-ed on my receiving this gentleman as one who is to be my hustand ; and I am ordered this
, afternoon to prepare for an interview.”-------
‘‘ And can you ! can my Maria (Said Melvill) “ thus cruelly refolve to abandon me for ever, “ just when I had refolution to declare my love ?” « _..<e You know (Said stie) it is my father’s “ order ; and you must llkewife know what “ will be the inevitable confequence of difobedi-“ ence from a man of his violent temper.” ‘‘ And “was this your bussnefs with me, Madam?— but I will not complain ; for Since I am indif-‘‘ ferent to Mifs Hartry, it matters not what “ becomes of me :—that you may for ever be “ happy,” was all that he could anfwer ; and w^as just going to quit the place, when Maria recalled him, by faying, with a tone of voice, that astonistied him, Although Mr. Melvill
“ may
66 A MORAL NOVEL.
“ may hereafter deSpife me, for my ingenuity, ** in So readily acknowledging my passion ; ne-verthelefs I can on no conssderation, be hypo-crite enough to di'guife the real feelings of my “ heart; what that di£lates my mouth must “ utter, nor can I to gain the world, be guilty “ of the least deceit; no, Sir, be assured that I “ will never give my hand to any one but you, even at the alter Should they drag me there -“ I will there assert my right of nature as a free-“ born Christian, nor give my hand to any one, “ when my heart is already difpos’d of to ano-then.”—-On hearing this Melvill stood like one thunderstruck or petrified ; at last taking her hand with a look of inexpressible tendernefs, he faid, Defpife you !---no my dear Maria ; I “ honour, I revere you for your ingenuous gene-rofity of fentimentamiable girl ! that could ‘‘ at once throw afide the veil of dissimulation, her fex fo often affeOi, and thus openly confefs “ her regard ;—oh, my dear angel you are too ‘‘ good, I can never deferve it.”-.-« Indeed you “ do (interrupted She) and much more ; but at ‘‘ prefent let us confider of the most probable “ means to extricate ourfelves from this dilem-‘‘ ma ; which the precipitate unkindnefs of a po-“ fitive parent, has thrown us into.”—-
After fome conversation on the fubjefil, it was agreed, that file stould inform Mr. Clunch of her dissike to him ; and if that would not do, even of her prepolSestion in favour of another ;
to
A MORAL NOVEL. 67
to perfuade him to discontinue his vissts; and, having exchanged vows of mutual fidelity, they parted ; fhe, to prepare for the reception cf a man whom fhe detested, and he to relate all that had pasted to Charlotte, which he did immediately on his return home : but before I proceed, it may not be improper to give my readers Some {ketch of Mr. Clunch’s family and character.
CHAP. XIV,
..........—~1 am much Sorry, Sir,
You put me to forget a lady’s manners By being fo verbal; and learn now for all That I who know my heart, do here pronounce By the very truth of it, I care not for you :
And am fo near the lack of charity
T’accufe myfelf, I hate you : which I had rather
You felt, than make my boast.
Cymbeline.
Mr. Clunch was the foie heir of Sir Toby Clunch, who having lost his wife in childbed of this Son, grew fo immoderately fond of him as never to Suffer him out of his fight; fo that we may reafonable fuppofe the education that he gave him was not the most refined ; indeed his only concern was, to make him master of hunting, fhooting, and other fuch rustic,
qualifications;
68 A MORAL NOVEL, qualifications; in which he fucceeded So happily, as to have him reckoned at the age of twenty-five, (the time of this propofal) the completeft fportfman in the county; that is, he would fight a main of cocks, drive a fet of horfes, ride a fox chace, drink his bottle, or (hoot flying, with any man in the three kingdoms for five hundred guineas, play or pay ; and in thefe five things confisted all his excellence ; Sweet recommendations ! to a girl of Maria’s delicate feelings: his father had likewife not forgot to instil fome of his favourite principles into him ; fuch as. Children have not, or ought not to have, any “ will of their own — that all their a6ti-“ ons tend to one great end,—obedience,” and many others equally arbitrary and ridiculous.
—When Sir Toby therefore mentioned this match to him, all the anfwer he made to it was,
—“ Why, ay. I’ll marry her, if you think it proper ; otherwstfe, T am very well as I am,— howfomever I’m glad you’ve appointed this afternoon for the meeting, becaufe I am en-gag’d to hunt to-morrow with neighbour ‘‘ Trottall.”-------
Such was the gentleman who arriv’d at Oak-hall to pay his addresses to the lovliest of her fex; and to whofe beauty her anxiety and concern gave an additional lustre : After a little general conversation, the young couple were left alone, and fome time elaps’d before one word was Spoke on -either fide, Mr. Clunch being very bufy in ty-
ing
A MORAL NOVEL. 69 ing feme knots in the lash of his whip ; however, recolle6Hng himfelf, he approach’d nearer to Maria, and made the following elegant Speech.
“ I fuppofe, Mifs, you know my buSinefs here ; “ my father has ordered me to wait on you ; for, “ as he fays, we are to be married, he thinks “ it proper, we should be a little acquainted be-forehand ; though, for my own part, I don’t fee the neceffity for it ; shut it stems it is the “ way of your great folk ; and Since I am here, “ I’ll tell you a piece of my mind,—look ye, “ Mifs, I am a man of few words,—I don’t love ‘‘ your high-flown Speeches, becaufe I don’t un-“ derfland them ; if you can like me for a huf-“ band,—I’m your man ;—but what do I fay << --if ?—for your father fays you must, and “ that’s enough.’- — A great deal more of the fame fort did Maria Suffer him to run on, before she interrupted him ; which she at length did, though in the gentlest terms poffible, lest he should fly into a paffion, and thereby roust her father, v/hom she knew to be not far off; with the most perfuaSive eloquence “ she begg’d him not to im-“ portune her any longer on the fubjedf, for that “ she could never think of him for an hushand, “ that she should always be proud to refpe<si him “ as an acquaintance ; but found herfelf unequal to the talk, of loving him vyith the tendernefs “ of a wife.”
Rough
70 A MORAL NOVEL.
Rough as the furrounding woods, all the an-fwer this unfeeling brute returned to her remonstrances, was, “ Why for the matter of that, I “ can’t help itI believe there will be but ‘‘ little love lost between us; nor stiould I ever have troubled my head about loving you, but that my father has expresty faid, I stiall marry
“ you ; and yours fays the fame.”-“ I am
“ Sure he could not fo far forget himfelf,” (replied Maria.)----Nay, but he did, (an-
« fwered the ’Squire) and marry me you must ; unlefs you have a mind to be a difobedient girl: —but as I am obliged to be out early to-** morrow, I will take my leave of you ; fo, “ Mifs, I wisti you a good night :™I fhall ac-quaint Sir Thomas with your behaviour, I aS-“ Sure you	your Servant—your Servant.”—So
faying, he Sallied out in quest of her father, to whom be related all that had pasted, not without Some favourable additions on his own side.
When Maria found herfelf alone, bursting into tears, with uplifted hands, stie exclaimed. And is it poffible, my father can feriousty think of marrying me to Such a wretch ?—a ‘‘ brute, devoid of every fenfe of feeling!—Tbwr **father fays you shall marry me^ thofe were his words —Sure no fuch unjust refolve ever “ could efcape his lips.—Would he, who hither-‘‘ to has let my inclinations be as free as air, for “ the fake of a little pelf, tie me to a wretch . “ whom my foul detests, on whom I can never
look
A MORAL NOVEL. yr look but with abhorrence ?—Shall marry me !—Oh! that parents would enforce their ‘‘ commands in gentler, more rational terms 1— Surely, if the Sin of difobedience admits of ‘LpalUation, it is where parents cruelly ufurp an “ authority, by endeavouring to force the hearts “ of their children ; and which no fituation in life, however elevated or debafed, can give “ them a juftiright to.:—Oh ! Melvill, you have my heart, and on you.alone will I bestow my band.”
Thus was the lovely Maria bewailing her misfortunes, when the door opened and prefented her father, with a much more angry look than she had ever Seen him wear before	Lit-
■ “ tie did I think, Maria, (faid he, on entering) that I should ever have fo much occaston to be “ dissatisfied with you, what is the reafon that “ vou do not behave even with common civility “ to the man whom I have fixed upon for your “ hushand	I did indeed, Sir (laid she) be-
“ have refpefilfully to him ; Oh, Sir !—on my ‘‘ knees, let me intreat you, by all the tender “ ties of nature, to remember, that equality and “ Sympathy of feelings in marriage, is the only “ probable method to enfure felicity do not “ make your only child unhappy, by dooming “ her to receive the churlish addresses of that “ odious man.—Man, do I call him ?—he is “ not worthy the name ; at brute, that,”—This “ to my face (interrupted Sir Thomas) take care,
take
72 AMORALNOVEL.
“ take care what you fay ;—I have always been a kind, indulgent father to you, can forgive “ any thing but obstinate difobedience. Make “ you unhappy !—why, have not I provided an hufband for you? a rich man !-—don’t I do “ all in my power to make you happy ?—and “ now, forfooth, you fay, you don’t like him ; ‘‘what I fuppofe you want a fine frenchified “ beau, full of flattery and fafhion, a thing “ made by taylors and barbers; go, go, you’re a “ filly girl, and don’t know what you like ; ** besides, what right have you to like ?—it is I must like.—Look ye, Maria, if you don’t ‘‘ alter your behaviour to Mr. Clunch, I’ll, I’ll, “ —but I’m in a paflfion, and won’t make any “ refolution ; however, don’t provoke me, be-ware the confequences, that is all,—beware the confequences.”-—" —So faying he flung her from him, with all the heat of paflTion, on the ground, where (he lay hardly fenfible, and prefented a fpedtacle fufficient to have touch’d the most obdurate heart: Sir Thomas was leaving her in this condition, when lady Hartry entered the room, brought thither by the elevation of her hufband’s voice ; as foon as Maria faw her Mother, immediately rising up. She desired her to intercede for her with Sir Thomas, whom stie faid, fhe had very unwillingly difob-liged, by expressing her reludtance at receiving the visits of Mr. Clunch, as of one who was to be her hufband, and earnestly begg’d her to dif-fuade him from the odious match on which he
had
A M O R A L N O V E L. 73
had Set his heart.—As nothing out of the common courfe of nature can be of any long con-■ tinuance ; So Sir Thomas’s passion foon began to fubssde, and give way to the powerful conduc-trefs of all our adlions, Reafon ; nor was he long able to withstand the well timed arguments of a Sensible wife, joined to the more powerful Solicitations of an amiable daughter> but kissing Maria, told her he had been too hasty, and faw his error, bid her be a good girl, and endeavour to like Mr. Clunch ; and concluded with an af-furance of doing every thing in his power to make her happy.—Thus this quarrel ended, and in an hour not only Seemed but really was forgot, by all the parties, except the heroine of the piece, whofe rest that night was not a little disturbed, by the concern She felt for her father’s obstinacy, in thus persisting in a match, which she never could or would agree to.
CHAP. XV.
What torments exceeding, what joys are above. The pains and the pleafures, that wait upon love ?
AS none of the family at Oak-hall were acquainted with Melvill’s passion, he continued his visits there as ufual, and in a few days had the happinefs of being an hour with his VoL. I.	D	Maria,
74 A MORAL NOVEL. Maria, who informed him of all the particulars of the fcene rdated in the last chapter. But, as the converfation of lovers is chiefly made up of repetitions, uninteresting to all but the parties concerned, and as I am a perfon of too nice honour to difcov.er the fecrets of others ; I stiall trouble my readers with no more of this than to fay, the refult of their conference was, that Maria should difcover the history of their passion to her mother, and beg her kind assistance, in endeavouring to pcrfuade Sir .Dhomas to agree to their marriage ; accordingly flie foon found an opportunity of relating the affair to lady Hartry, which Sue did with the most candid ingenuity, without concealing a Single circumstance ; at the Same time intreating her, as she valued her happinefs and peace of mind, to perfuade Sir Thomas not to attempt to force her inclinations, and lay her under the fev^ere talk of difobedience to a parent’s commands. This good woman was lb well pleafed at her daughter’s Sincerity, that she wanted but little perfuaflon to do what she was deSired, and promifed, that the first opportunity die had, flve would ufe all the rhetoric she was mistrefs of, to perfuade her hushand to relinquish all thoughts of Adr. Clunch.
The next time they were alone, he luckily open’d the fubjeO:, by faying, “ I can’t imagine what reafon that girl can have, for So strongly objedting to marrying the perfon whom my prudence has feleded, as one fit to be her huS-
“ band ;
A MORAL NOVEL. 75 band ; a young man of perfon, family and for-“ tune who demands no money till after my death too ; a plaguing, provoking little jade ; when I have found a Suitable match for her, in all “ refpedls, She forfooth, must objedf to it, by faying, She cannot love himy but stie Shall have “ him I’m determin’d, or I’ll never give her a “ farthing.”—As lady Hartry had pre-refolved not to mention a word of Melvill, lest he Should imagine, (as he Sometimes would) that she was joined in a plot against him ; she only interrupted him, by gently Saying, “ Nay, now my dear, you are indeed too violent; conSider, that we “ can never account for natural antipathies of ‘‘ our own, to particular people, much lefs for thofe of others; she is young and may Jiere-“ after know better : but let me intreat you, as she is So strongly refolved against the match, “ to think no more of it. Don’t, Sir Thomas, make your girl unhappy.”—But all this stgni-fied nothing ; he had formed a refolution, and it was not in the power of words to make him alter it; he was refolutely determined not to give up the point, therefore ending where he began, “ that “ if she would not marry Clunch, he would dif-“ inherit her,” he left the room.
Maria had been waiting to be informed of her doom from her mother, and though when she Saw Sir Thomas, she thought she could too plainly read it in his countenance ; still as uncertainty, (even in mifery) is painful, she was D 2	willing
76 A MORAL NOVEL, willing to be convinced of her wretchednefs; and accordingly hastened to lady Hartry, whom fhe found in tears, and who, after having endeavoured in Some meafure to comfort her, inform’d her circumstantially of all that had pasted ; fhe, for fome time, heard her with great Seeming patience, and finding fhe had done fpeaking, clafping her hand, immediately exclaimed with great energy,—“ and does he still thus cruelly perfist in his refolve ? then am I doom’d for “ ever to be miferable, as no power on earth fhall ever force me to agree to it.”—Lady Hartry endeavoured all in her power to argue Maria into temperature ; and, as eloquence is to reafon dov^^n the fever of the blood, and footh with words the tumult of the foul, fo it never was better applied than at prefent; for fhe in a fhort time coolly listen’d to her mother’s advice, which was, to inform Melvill of what had pasted and give him leave to make open propofals to her father, “ who, (added fhe) when he finds “ your affe6tions fixed on another obje<9:, may perhaps give his confent to that, which it will “ not be in his power to prevent.”——Maria accordingly, the next morning, wrote a letter to Melvill, informing him of what the reader has before heard, and concluded it in thefe words, “ Since my father has thought proper to throw off the indulgence which ought to accompany that name, you have my free confent, to make “ whatever propofals to him your love didlates.” His regard for her, must indeed have been very
trifling,
A MORAL NOVEL. 77 trifling, not to have understood her meaning, which he did in its full force, and accordingly waited on Sir Thonnas that very day ; and, after the first civilities were over, opened to him the occaSion of his vifit; who as it was quite un-expedted," did not attempt to interrupt him in his difcourfe; but when he had finilhed, made the
following reply.--1 fhall always esteem Mr.
“ Melvill, as a friend and as a neighbour ; but “ can never think of him for a fon-in-law :—I “ have pasted my word to another gentleman “ had I not, I could never listen to your propo-tc fals.—Confider, Sir, that by your late father’s will, you are not of age, nor will be thefe « three years; you can therefore make no “ fettlement on Maria, except her own fortune, ‘‘ which a beggar can equally do ; and would «« you have me give my only daughter to a beg-gar ? for fuch in fa6t it would be : and as for « trusting to your love for her three years hence, ‘‘ it is nothing at all, postefllon foon cloys; for “ what man rifes from a feast with that keen ap-“ petite with which he first fat down
I am forty, very forry, Sir, (Said Melvill) to find you have fo bad an opinion of me ; but even allowing my love for your daughter Should “ abate, I fay. Sir, allowing your cruel, unjust « fufpicion to prove true, love for myfelf would ‘‘ engage me to fulfill my promifes,—my honour, “ Sir.”—‘‘ Honour (cried Sir Thomas) is not “ what it was; I remember when, as it ought, it was as facred as a man’s bond, and I stiould D 3	have
78 A MORAL NOVEL.
have thought myfelf as Secure from the one as other; but that time is past, and I very much fear, never to be recalled.—Honour is the offspring of fair truth and honesty, yet to what bafe, what Scandalous uSes, do we not ‘‘ See it perverted ?—Does a man want to Seduce an Innocent girl, honour’s his cry, his honour will oblige him to marry her;—and thus, ‘‘ while he professes a most noble, glorious virtue, “ does he not commit the most abandoned a6:s of wickedneSs !—It is now So Shamefully cor-“ rupted, that it Serves but for a gilded bait to “ catch unwary fools; I am forry to Say it, but who trusts to the bare proSpedt of a man’s ho-“ nour, trusts too often to a broken staff: but far be it from me to arraign your’s.—No Sir, I believe you may have a stri6t SenSe of it, I hope “ you have ; if So, I am glad of it, but still I can-‘‘ not think of you for my daughter, don’t let me hear any more of it; I beg you’ll not rob “ me of an agreeable acquaintance, by laying me under the necessity of forbidding you my houfe.”
----Melvill found the truth of all he Said So
strong, that he could make no anSwer to it; and Sir Thomas was leaving the room, when he caught him by the hand, crying, in the most Supplicating tone, “ Do not, dear Sir, make “ your amiable daughter unhappy by a refuSal.” Unhappy! (re-echoed Sir Thomas) why you
have not Sure ?--You cannot So far have
“ prevail’d upon her, that she has agreed to this “ propoSal; but I’ll hear it from her own mouth.”
—So
A MORAL NOVEL. 79
— So faying, he Sallied out in quest of the unfortunate Maria, who luckily was not to be found, and he returned rather cooler than he went, to tell Melvill, that after what had pasted, he must destre him to discontinue his vifits.— This was a painful Sentence to our almost dif-trafted lover; who, however, bore his misfortune with firmneSs, and departed from; Oak-hall, without gaining one Sight of his amiable af-fliSled.
CHAP. XVI.
• I’m giddy, expeTation whirls me round,
Th’ imaginary relish is So fv/eet,
That it inchants my fenSe ; what will it be When that the wat’ry palate tastes indeed Love’s thrice reputed ne6iar.?
Troilus and Cress id a,
SIR Thomas began now' feriousty to confider, that gentle means would be the most probable, to make his daughter conquer her distike to one lover, and obliterate her regard for the other; in the evening, therefore, he gently tax’d her with her pashon for fvfelvill, and as she had heard of his viSit, of which too well gueshng the cauSe,, she knew it would be to no porpofe to deny it ; and therefore acknowledg’d his SuSpicions to be D 4	just ;
8o A MORAL NOVEL.
just ; at the fame time, begging his pardon, and promising, never to make him unhappy by a clandestine marriage :—in anfwer to which, he inform’d her; that, if stie Should ever be guilty of fuch an imprudent step, from that day She must forfeit all pretenSions to his favour; which to enfure, he still infisted on her receiving Clunch’s viSits, whom he inform’d her, was the next day to be at Oak-hall :■—She begg’d, She intreated. She would promife any thing, provided he would give up that point.—But her prayers and tears, alas, were all too ineffeftual ; his whole heart was Set upon it; nor could any argument, however strong and forcible, change the fettled pur-pofe of his foul.
Her time, therefore, now pasted wretchedly, being bound to the irkfome company of a man, whom She detested ; or in hearing the terrifying threats of her father : Sometimes indeed. She gain’d a short refpite, by being left alone with her mother, who pitied her Situation, and tenderly endeavoured to alleviate the torments of her breast, with all the Soft feelings of an indulgent parent ; and whenever Sir Thomas was from home, as she knew that all her felicity was center’d in Melvill’s company. Sent for him to Oak-hall, who, with joy, obey’d the glad Summons, fo that his moments would have pasted far from difagreeable, had it not been for the melancholy refledlion of what his dear Maria must Suffer at other times; but as he Saw there
was
A MORAL NOVEL. Bi was no likelihood of his ever gaining her father’s confent to their union, after fome struggles of refledlion, he ventur’d to mention a Secret marriage to her ; but she would not listen to it, and silenc’d him by faying,—that tho’ her father had thus thrown off the kindnefs of a parent, still she would Support the duty of an obedient daughter, as she did not think any unkindnefs of his side, could authorize Such an a£l of indifcretion in her :——-Happy would it be, were every young lady of this way of thinking ; how many miferable hours would it then fave themfelves, and others.-......
Various and many were the Schemes which Melvill thought of, whereby to gain Sir Thomas’s confent; but still they could afford him but the momentary pleafure of imagination, as he for Sometime could hit on none likely to effedt it: however, after long patience and perfeverance, his invention fram’d one, which appear’d to him fo likely to Succeed, that he determin’d to mention it the next time he went to Oak-hall.. The wish’d-for moment Soon arriv’d, and the above thought gave him fo unufual a flow of Spirits, that Maria, could not avoid ashing him the reafon : taking her hand with inexpreffible tendernefs, he reply’d,— “ I have, my dearest life, at last, thought of Something which may make us both happy ; but as fome deceit is necessary on your side, " I did not choofe to mention it, being well con-D 5	vinc’d,.
82 A M O R A L N O V E L.
“ vinc’d, that your fenfe of truth is fo stri£l> you would Scruple a falshood, even in thought.”—-Having thank’d him in a genteel manner for his compliment, she deSir’d to know what it was, Saying,-----that if she thought there was any pro-
bability of its fuccefs, she would venture a great deal, to be freed from the mifery in which she then liv’d ; but (added she) here comes my mother, let her hear it; and if she approves thereof, that alone will be reafon fufficient for me to put it into execution.
Lady Hartry having join’d the company, Mel-vill told them the Scheme from which he entertain’d fuch flattering hopes, in the following words;—“ It is (Said he) that Maria shall feign an implicit obedience to her father’s commands, in receiving the addresses of Mr. Clunch ; that “ she shall even carry her Seeming duty fo far, as “ to go to church with him, and then publickly refufe him at the altar : this, of courfe will convince Sir Thomas of her firm refolve, never “ to marry the man whom he has fix’d upon ; which will alfo be So public an affront to my rival, as to shake off his difagreeable folicita-tions: I will take care to be prefent, and make ufe of all my rhetoric, to perfuade him to con-** Sent to our union ; if he is cruel enough to en-“ tertain a doubt of my making a Settlement on ‘‘ Maria, when I comse of age, I will even agree to have cur marriage postpon’d to that period, and at the fame, to put a private one out of
our
A MORAL NOV E L. 83 our power, will confent to reside, abroad, du-ring all the intervening time and notwith-“ standing his late behaviour, l am So well con-vinc’d of his natural goodnefs of heart, that, added thereto my perfuasion, the Solemnity of of the place, and his furprife at So Sudden and “ unexpeisied an affair, will, altogether, be too much for him to resist ; and then, my dearest “ girl, we fhall with pleafure look back on all thefe obstacles as- stronger incitements to us, to “ love each other hereafter, with increasing ar-dour; for as the poet fays ;
“ Love in Security but faintly burns,
“ But after doubts and fears, more bright returns.”
Altho’ this was certainly the most unaccountable thought that ever enter’d into a madman’s head ; still, as a lover, we must not wander at his adopting it; and Maria coming under the fame predicament, we must not be furpriz’d, at his finding So little difficulty in perfuading her to agree to any thing which carried with it the least probability of infuring her happinefs ; tho’ fhe often repeated, that the hypocriSy would be very painful: but what fhall we fay to lady Hartry ? in whom, to ufe Hamlet’s words, “ The heigh-day in her blood was tame, was humble, and waited on the judgmentyet Such is the frailty of hiu man nature, that tho’ fhe made the most Scruples, Melvill’s perfuasions, join’d to her wifhes for Maria’s happinefs, Soon overcame her Scruples
§4 A MORAL NOVEL.
pies of deceit; and it was therefore agreed, that this Scheme Should be immediately carried into execution; and as Maria was the principal ac-. trefs, we may be hire she determined to hasten it as much as poffible.
CHAP. XVII.
And yet methinks duty cannot demand th* Sacrifice of my own happineSs! Surely neither heaven or nature require me, in obedience to a parent, to marry a man with whom I must be for ever miserable.
The Opera of Tom Jones.
OUR lovers, thus happy in the anticipation of future joys, had been Some time alone ; when they were Suddenly furpriz’d by the unex-pe6i;ed return of Sir Thomas, who immediately burst into the room where they were fitting; happy was it for lady Hartry that she had left them, being thereby render’d unfufpedted of having had any hand in the meeting ; although the bare finding the young couple together, would have been Sufficient grounds for Sir Thomas to have reprimanded Melv ill ; yet to add to the misfortune, he had interrupted them in a minute. Sacred alone to love and privacy ; in short, he
had
A MORAL NOVEL. 85
had found his daughter clafp’d in the arms of him she fondly lov’d : to defcribe the Surprize painted on each of their countenances at this minute, would require the pen of a Fielding, or the pencil of a Hogarth ; there was hut one part for Maria to take; and therefore, with an assum’d anger, pushing Melvill from her, she utter’d Some few inarticulate words in a kind of reproof. —?—Sir Thomas now began, by telling him, that after what had past’d, he was much fur-* priz’d at feeing him there, andinSissed he would not for the future trouble Oak-hall with his company, for if he did, as a gentleman, he should be obliged to call him to an account for his behaviour. Melvill, willing to improve on the hint he had receiv’d from Maria, begg’d his pardon in the most humble manner; adding, that he need no longer be under any apprehenssons concerning his visits at Oak-hall, as he had been Sufficiently tutor’d on that fubjefl: by his daughter, whofe anger he had already incurred, by his unpardonable prefumption ; fo faying, he took his leave, inwardly pleas’d at having left Maria fo fair an opening towards the profecution of their Scheme; nor was she at all behind-hand with him in contrivance : for when her father began to reprimand her for feeing Melvill, contrary to his exprefs commands, she interrupted him by faying, that, according to his orders, she had endeavour’d all in her power to forget him, in which she was fo happy as to have fucceeded, but that, if she had any little esteem for him left,
he
86 AMORAL N O V E L.
he had now forfeited it, by this last a£l of imprudence ; as a proof of which, fhe was willing to receive favourably Mr. Clunch’s vistts, and ready to enter into an alliance with that family, as foon as was agreeable to her father.
Sir Thomas kifs’d her, call’d her his good, his dutiful child ; and, in his fondnefs, was as ridiculousty foolifh as in his anger : he had formerly been imprudently passionate ; and the’ Maria, out of a pretended coynefs, objedted to fo early a time, he insssted on that day fev’n-night being fixed for the wedding, and that all necessary preparations stould be immediately begun ; to which our heroine, with great Seeming reludlance, at length confented,. promising to obey her father, in every thing, who instantly ran to communicate this good news to his wife.
It was on the evening of this happy day, before Sir Thomas had Scarce recover’d from the tranfports which the first knowledge of his daughter’s obedience had thrown him into, when the happinefs of this family was not a little increas’d, by the arrival of ^Emily Summers, tho’ the felicity of most of them fprung from different caufes;—as this young lady was no stranger at Oak-hall, her prefenee did not in least restrain the lively fallics of the Baronet’s joy; nor had fne been long arriv’d, before she w'as given to understand the reafon.—Nothing could equal her astonishment at this news, as
she
A MORAL NOVEL. S7
she thought, from their long and sincere friend-. ship, Maria had not behaved with her ufual generosity, in concealing it from her, which she had intirely done, except giving her the hint, which the reader may remember, in her last letter, and which could refer to nothing elfe ; nor was this thought confin’d to her own breast, she foon found an opportunity of taxing her friend with unkindnefs, v/ho immediately related to her, all that the reader has before heard ; as likewife, her intended fcheme.—^mily knew it would be to no purpofe to distuade her from it; and as Maria had put fo much confidence in her, by trusting her with a fecret of this nature, she could not, in honour, divulge it to Sir Thomas, of which, at first, she had Some design ; she therefore, though without the least hopes of its fuccefs, leem’d to acquiefce therein, and promis’d to do all in her power towards the execution of it.—Charlotte Howard was the next day made acquainted with the arrival of their mutual friend .^Tmily, and at the earnest request of both, added one more to this happy circle, for tho’ Sir Thomas had dropp’d all acquaintance with Melvill, still this did not alter his behaviour to, or diminish his regard for the rest of Mr. Howard’s family.
CHAP.
88 A M O R A L N O V E L.
CHAP. XVIII.
-------——— Understand more dear
What’s past and what’s to come, is strew’d with hulks
And formlefs ruin of oblivion.
Trolius and Cressida.
TH £ necessary preparations for Maria’s wedding were immediately begun, and Clunch fpent as much of his time as he could fpare from his rustic amufements, at Oak-hall with his intended bride, who received his visits with great Seeming complacence, confcious that that they could be of no long continuance. When she was not thus employed, she had the felicity of enjoying the company 'of her two friends, without controul; and indeed the af-fedtion which thefe young ladies had mutually for each other, made their time to pafs with the greatest Social harmony; every day brought with it Some new pleafure ; and, as the Surest means of augmenting their festivity, each of them Seem’d more alTiduous to promote the blifs of the other two than her own., A sigh, indeed,, would Sometimes unwarily efcape from poor Maria; who, as the destin’d day drew nigh, feemed every moment to lofe Some of her resolution ; to- add to which, her friend Charlotte (on the day before the intended marriage) for reafons very apparent, made an excufe to return
home
*.AMOARL NOVEL. 89 home; by that means avoiding being prefent at the propofed nuptials.
During this young lady’s stay at Oak-hall, poor Melvill’s time had pasted but heavily ; however, to compensate for all his torments, she brought him a letter from Maria, containing fresh astiirances of regard ; which when he received, in an involuntary extafy, he exclaimed ;
Sweet love ! fweet lines! Sweet life !
Here is her hand, the agent of her heart.
Here is her oath for love, her honour’s pawn. Oh, that her father would approve our loves, To Seal our happinefs with his confent!
Oh, heavenly Maria 1
As it was agreed on, that Melvill should leave England, as Soon as he had gained a promife from Sir Thomas to confent to their marriage when he came of age : he had taken care to prepare every thing necestary for his voyage ; nor indeed was he difpleafed at thus having a plea to Satisfy his eager curiosity, by visiting foreign countries, tho’ at the price of being fe-parated from Maria. And when the destined morn arriv’d, he hastened to the church, where the other company were already assembled ; consisting of the intended bride and bridegroom, iEmily Summers, Sir Thomas and Lady Hartry, and Sir Toby Clunch: Maria trembled with apprehension; but that only Serv’d to cast an
unufual
90 A M O R A L NOVEL. *
unufual glow upon her countenance, and made her look uncommonly berTutiful; nor was her . concern on Such an occaSion taken notice of, as a modest diffidence is ufual.
Although Melvill stood a great way behind the rest of the company, he could not avoid the eyes of Sir Thomas, who thought it not a little extraordinary for him to be there ; however,
^ still keeping his post, he stood agitated by violent hopes and fears. Maria went through the former part of the ceremony tolerably well, till the critical minute arrived : and here I fain would conceal the weaknefs of my heroine; but truth obliges me to maintain my chara6fer, and inform my readers of every particular, without fuppreffing any. Jndge then, if you possibly can, kind reader, what were poor Melvill's fenfations, when, on her being afked the important question, after near a minute’s Silence, he heard her feebly pronounce, I will ; his astonishment and rage for fome time, were both fo great, that he stood motlonlefs; at last, casting at her a look of distradfioio, he hurried out of the church, and throwing himfelf into a post chaife, which had been ordered to wait for him, proceeded to Mr. Howard’s, to whom in a few minutes he related what had happened, and fet out the next day for Dover, but with a far different opinion of the female fex, than what he flattered himfelf he should have begun his travels with : thoughts of himfelf alone had for fome
time
A MORAL N O V E I^.	91
time occupied his mind ; but anger against Maria now took its place, which he vented as ■follows, “Yes, I have long been blinded by “ paffion, but that at last is over, my natural “ reafon has regain’d her power ; and I can now “ fee, nay feel, what an abjedl wretch he must “ be, who trusts his happinefs in a woman’s “ power; fmiling mifchiefs all, that crocodile-like, flatter but to betray: thus then I dif-“ claim all thoughts of a Serious connedlion with any of the fex ; but why do I still talk of, or “ trouble myfelf about her, fhe is not worth a “ thought ; and I hope I stiall get quite clear of “ her idea before I reach Dover — on the Road to which place we must leave him, and return to fee what happened at the church after his departure.
CHAP. XIX.
Why tell you me of moderation ?
The grief is fine, full, perfedl that I taste.
And in its fenfe is no lefs strong, than that Which caufeth it. How can I moderate it ?
Troilus and Cressiu-a.
I Don’t doubt but my young female readers (if any fuch I am honoured with) will all be apt to condemn and defpife poor Maria for want ef fidelity, or rather of refolution ; but let them
confider
92 A M O R A L N O V E L. consider one minute, and make her cafe their own, and I am fure their contempt will be converted into generosity. A young lady, educated with So sirifit a fenfe of honour and truth as she was, could not be guilty of fuch premeditated deceit ; the folemnity of the place, the awful grandeur of the ceremony, all, all forbad it; passion had before obfcur’d her reafon, but it now justly appeared to her, like going to church with a design to utter a premeditated fatfehood in the sight of God : yet notwithstanding all this, she fuffered the most painful conflidf, before she could fo far let her virtue overcome her love; but when she had thus nobly gain’d an afcendancy over her paffions, she felt that innate fatisfadlion which confcious virtue always does, on the performance of any good adfion ; but that fatisfadtion was but of a very short duration, and instantly vanished, when, on turning her head round, she obferved in Melvill’s face, the distradfion of his heart, and immediately after faw him leave the church ; it was then the thoughts of having deceived him, and lost him for ever, rush’d upon her mind in their full force; nay, even with aggravated circumstances: this was far too much for her tender nature to Support; she immediately fainted away, before the material parts of the ceremony were performed, and threw the whole church into confusion : she was carried home fenfelefs; but by being puf to bed, and the application of proper remedies, foon came to herfelf.
Almost
A MORAL NOVEL. 93 Almoft every one then prefent, put different construdtions on this accident: No one except lady Hartry and ifEmily were acquainted with the true caufe : they had as well as Maria ob-Served Melvill, and, on his leaving the church in So extraordinary a manner, had too well guessed what were his intentions : to thefe, when alone, our afflidled heroine unburthened her full heart; and having made all the excufes she could think of, to palliate her infidelity, conjur’d her mother, as a proof of her fympa-thetic feelings, to fend to know what was become of Melvill : lady Hartry, with true maternal fondnefs, was ready to admit of any plea that her daughter could make, and joined with fflmily in affuring her, that she thought her , more worthy of pity than cenfure; after which she mentioned her fufpicions of Melvill’s being gone abroad, the better to prepare her for fuch a stroke, in cafe it should piove true, and pro-mifed to fatisfy her curioSity, by fending to Mr. Howard’s immediately, which she accordingly did; and in return to her message, had the mortification of hearing from Charlotte, that Melvill was by that time at Calais, having previous to his departure, informed Mr. Howard of that part of the affair, which was left untold by her, only becaufe she was not acquainted with the issue of their fcheme ; that his intention was to endeavour, by a variety of objefils, to drive from his mind, a woman, whom he no longer held worthy of a place in it; and lastly, that he
had
94 A M O R A L N O V E L.
had promis’d to v/rite when he arrived at Paris. —It was on this promife only, that lady Hartry ventur’d to inform her daughter of what she had beard, which she at length did, though with the greatest caution and tendernefs; gently breaking it to her, by almost imperceptible degrees, till she had made her acquainted with the whole.
Altho’ poor Maria was very well prepar’d for this blow, and though it was no more than wshat she might reafonably expect, still she had flattered herfelf with the old proverb. That ‘while there's life, there's hope; she had flatter’d herfelf, that when Melvill’s anger began to fubside, he would stay and fee the end of fo extraordinary an affair ; that he would defer his journey, till he was thoroughly convinced of her infidelity :—he thought very justly, that nothing could be a stronger proof thereof, than thus giving herfelf to another before his face ; his paflion obfcur’d thofe reafons which arofe fo powerfully in her mind to countenance the a£I; thofe reafons lasted but fo long, as while she remain’d in that uncertainty of doubt and fear, but when the anfwer to her mother’s note arriv’d, she inSisted on feeing it, which lady tlar-try at first refus’d, as ^thinking one part thereof, not fo proper for her perufai; but as it is im-poflible long to maintain a denial of any thing to thofe we love, Maria foon got the better, and by her vidory was made completely miferable;
for
A MORAL NOVEL. 95 for tho- her mother had before inform’d her of every part thereof, still stie had done it in a manner which gave her fome fmall gleam of hones, and which, by the stght of it, stie was convinc’d (he had no rcafon to indulge ; for a long time aster reading it, her mind was torn by the contrary pasticns of contempt, love and pity ; fometiraes stie would rail at him for not wailing to fee the event of an affair, which it fo nearly concern’d him to be acquainted with ; at others. She would exprefs her commendations of him for thus behaving to a perfon who had ufed him fo fcandalouSiy, and then would vent the most bitter invectives against herfelf; but as according to the natural order of things, the human constitution cannot long thus exist upon the stretch, in a stiort time the agony of her mind affedled the body, arid threw her into a violent fever, in which stie quickly became delirious, and was continually calling on Melvill ,• fometimes she would talk to him as if he were prefent, at others, (Ite would fall into the most violent Sits of passionate rage, and in this manner rave, till nature being almost exhausted, a stood of tears came feafonably to her relief.
Confeious, that from her fo often mentioning Melvill’s name. Sir Thomas must imagine there was Something more at the bottom of this affair than he was acquainted with, lady Hartry, by the advice of ffimily, (who behav’d with more than cofnmon prudence, in Such a fccne of complicated
96 A MORAL NOVEL.
plicated distrefs) related to him all she knew of the affair, kindly endeavouring to exempt poor Maria from as much blame as she possibly could: —To her great joy, this news was received in a far different manner from what she expected ; for as foon as Sir Thomas knew the caufe of his daughter’s illnefs, he us’d every means in his power, to hasten her recovery ; at her first interval of reafon, with the most affiduous tender-nefs, he defir’d her to compofe her Spirits, acknowledging, that he was convinc’d of the folly of his condudl, and determin’d no longer to oppofe her happinefs; she thank’d him for the kindnefs of his intention, adding, ‘‘ how happy ‘‘ would this goodnefs once have made me! now “ ’tis an aggravation of my Sorrow, and comes “ like a reprieve when execution’s pash”
With all the affedtion of friendship, and, at the fame time, with the unlimited extent of parental love, he us’d every argument he could think of, to palliate her grief ; and as a proof of the sincerity of his wishes for her happinefs, instantly wrote a leiter to Melvill, (which he di-refited to the post houfe at Calais) acquainting him with the. alteration of his Sentiments, and kindly re-inviting him to Oak-hall.
CHAP.
A MORAL NOVEL. 97
CHAP. XX.
» ....... .....Nature craves
All dues be render’d to their owners! now What nearer debt in all humanity.
Than daughter to the mother}
Troilus and Cress id a.
AS Maria had now gain’d her father’s' consent to an union, which, she flatter’d herfelf, would one day take place; notwithstanding the fears she had, lest Melvill should meet abroad with Some lady, whole beauty, join’d to her ill ufage, might eaSily efface all remembrance of her former kindnefs; the tranquillity of her mind was foon in Some degree restored, which, added to her youth and natural strength, began to re-establish her health ; the rofes that So long had left her cheeks, began now to recover their accustom’d bloom ; and, as after a tedious gloomy winter, all nature gladdens at the approach of fpring, fo there was no one in the houfe, or neighbourhood, who did not really rejoice at Maria’s recovery, which was in a short time totally completed :—and thus the family at Oak-hall, (of which iEmily still made one) all but Maria, regain’d their former ferenity and peace.
When Mr. Clunch found that Sir Thomas ^ was no longer an advocate for him with Maria, VoL, I.	E	he
gS A M O R A t. N O V E Lo
he was eassly induc’d to retra6l his claim, and in a few weeks after, married the daughter of one of his father’s tenants, with whom he probably found more real happinefs, than ever he could have done with a perfon, whofe fentiments and purSuits were fo widely different from his .own.
As Sir Henry Summers had now been abfent much longer than he at first intendecl, iEmily began to be not a little furprized thereat, as well as puzzled, to find out what bufinefs he could have there to detain him So long ; nor eoiild she avoid observing, that she shad never made mention of it in any one of his letters; however, as he wrote constantly to inform her of shis welfare, and as Mr. Martin shad in shis last letter given her a hint of an intended vifit, she was eafily prevail’d upon by Maria to remain at Oak-hall ; where, by their mutual defire, Charlotte Howard now %vas.
Nothing therefore was wanting to complete the felicity of this family, but Melvill’s return,, which Maria had waited for. Some time, with the greatest refignation and patience ; but when the period was elapfed, whereat she had flattered hcr-felf with the pleasing expe6iation of beholding him, and in which she was most grrevoufly disappointed, her former uneafinefs began to return, and from the natural inclination which she had for foUtude, Soon fettled into a melancholy despondence.
A MORAL NOVEL. 99 dence, when, as if adverfe fate had not already Sufficiently tormented her, Mr. How^ard received a letter from Melvili, wherein he inform’d him, —“ That be had just recovered from a violent fit of illnefs, and was preparing to leave Paris (where he then was) in order to visit Madrid; that it still remained his firm refolve to endeavour, by a quick fucceffion of new objeQs, to recall his heart from Oak-hall; that as he stiould be continually upon the move, it would be jm-postible for him to hear from England ; his design in which was, to avoid feeing the very name of Hartry, that nothing might retard the cure he hoped in a short time to work in his mifplaced affections.’*
It was very apparent from this, that he had never received the letter Sir Thomas Sent after him to Calais; and altho’ the news pierc’d poor Maria to the heart, yet still, to oblige her parents, she endeavoured to assume the placid Smiles of cool indifference ; Oh, what a painful talk to wear a chearful countenance with a gloomy heart !—Out of duty and complaifance to them she entered into company, though at the fame time she longed to be alone, to indulge her melancholy ressedlions on. this unfortunate affair, which was the more So to her, as she could blame no one for it but herfelf: her two bofom friends, j®mily and Charlotte, endeavoured all in their power to comfort her, the latter of whofe company she was remarkably fond of, as she E z	knew
100 A M O R A L N t) V E L.
knew by fatal experience the torments of divided love, and would fometimes humour her affli6ti-on, by talking of Melvill, in return for which Maria w'ould fympathize with her in her grief, for the long, long lost Charles Hartry : in this manner, by each having a friend to Ihare in their afflidtions, the burthen lay the lighter upon either :—-But as thefe refleftions will not deliver poor Maria from her miferable fituatlon ; and, as I at prefent fee no probable means of doing it, I must be contented to leave her as she is, and I take fome further notice of -ffimily’s affairs.
It was now in the delightful month of May, about Six in the evening, while our female friends were Sitting in a natural alcove, form’d by furrounding jeffamies and woodbines, their attention abforb’d, in listening to a natural concert of the feather’d choisters around, fuperior far to any which the rigid rules of art can didlate, when they were fuddenly Surprized by the appearance of a gentleman, whom, on his nearer approach, .®mily difcovered to be no other than Mr. Martin ; who, to add to her joy, inform’d her, that her uncle would be there the enfuing morning : the first Salutations were Scarce over, before Charlotte and Maria took an opportunity of leaving their friend to enjoy, without referve, the company of that man, for whom alone she Seem’d to wish to live: ^mily faw, or at least fancied she Saw, an unfual ferioufnefs painted on his countenance, nor could she forbear ashing
him
A M O K A L NOVEL. loi him the reafon ; but he evaded an explanation, by the weak excufe of being fatigued by his journey ; though this was not the real caufe, as the reader will prefently be convinced.—The next morning, agreeable to what Mr. Martin had told her, iEmily had the fatisfaflion of embracing her uncle; who, in a Ihort time after his arrival, not a little astonish’d her by the following difcourfe.
“ It may not now (my dear i^mily) be impro-“ per to acquaint you with the caufe of my So “ fudden expedition, at which I don’t doubt you
Were very much furprifed ; but I am Sure you “ will be much more fo, when, previous to what “ I have to Say, I must assure you, that you are “ not my niece ; nor did I, till within this short
time, know any relation you had in the world.” ■—^Emily’s Surprize at hearing this piece of news, may be much better imagined than deScribed ; however, as no words could convey a proper idea of her astonishment, she Sat Silent, and Suffered Sir Harry to proceed without interruption. —He had informed Martin (who was then pre-fent) of this affair before ; and indeed this was the caufe of that inquietude which ^Emily had taken notice of the preceding evening ; for when he found there were no ties of kindred between Sir Harry and his ward, and still heard the warm manner in which he Spoke of her, he began to be under Some apprehenSions, lest in his old age he should play the fool, by singing amorous dities to the bloom of nineteen ; fo ready are we £3	to
102 A M O' R A L N O V E L, to furmife whatever our fear dictates.—Sir Harry now related to u$mi!y all the circurastances relative to his finding herj that the reader has before heard in the former part of this history and then proceeded as follows,
** Soon after, this extraordinary affair happened^.
I was telling it to,a circle of gentlemen, none of whom chofe to believe, me, but all perfisted, in attributing to me a larger Share thereof than I had any right to.—And altbo’ I then, and ever since have ufed all possible means to dif-cover your parents, it has been to no purpofe; till a siiort time ago an intimate acquaintance, one of thofeto whom I had mentioned thecir-“ cumsiance, and now residing in Ireland, fent me word, that he had discovered the parent-of my .^mily ; and if I wisti’d to be fully fatisfi-“ ed thereof, desired my immediate attendance at Dublin.—You may easily irriagine that I did not hesitate one monent what step to take ; “ the hurry of my departure will fufficiently evince lo you, the eagernefs of my curiosity,-^
• “ On my arrival in Dublin, my friend, at whofe desire I had made the journey, informed me,, that he had met with the lady, concerning whom he wrote to me, after the follow-ing manner ; by the accidental misfortune of “ her foot’s flipping, she had fallen down in the ^ street, had he not, by the greatest good luck, been behind her, and offering his arm, imme-diately led her into an adjoining shop : when
“ she.
A MORAL NOVEL. roj ** fhe was a little recovered from the fright which this accident had thrown her into, (he found that she had happily received no other “ hurt,than a flight Scratch on the hand by a posh “ on which she had endeavoured to Save herfelP ‘f from falling ; when on taking out her pocket-** book, to Search for a bit of sticking plaister tt> ** apply to the wounds an open paper fell out, ‘‘ which he picked up and gave her, though he could not avoid first reading it as-he held it in ** his hand, having Seen fome words ho reeolleQ;-“ ed elfewhere; and was amazed to find it con-** tained the fame words, as that which I difco-“ vered pinn’d upon your breast, and which I ‘‘ had frequently shewn him.*-*-So extraordinary « a circumstance awakened his cutiofity and ih the way to her lodgings, where common ci-vility oblig’d him to attend her, with many-apologies for the question, he begg’d to know “ on what occasion thofe words were wrote, and, as he affured her,, that he had other motives than curiosity for this inquiry, she fea-dlly Satisfied him ; at the fame time, giving hirn> the history of her life, from which he was con-“ vinced it could be no other than- your mother.
■—At my desire he immediately introduced me “ to her ; and having before informed her, what share I hadin the businefs, she was as eager to relate, as I was to hear, the story of her woe ; “ though both our desires Sprung from different ** motives; mine, from the hopes of making a worthy woman happy (for fuch, from my-E 4,	«*‘friend'so
ro4 A M O R A L N O V E L.
’‘friend’s account, I was Sure She must be) by “ delivering to her arms a daughter whom a mo-“ narch might boast of; and hers, from the ex-“ pedtation of becoming a joyful mother, at a “ time when fhe had So little reafon to look for “ fuch a blessing She therefore fatisfied my curiosity, as follows.
C II A P. XXC
'-'Virtue tho’^ of winds and waves the Sport,
By passions Shaken, and by dangers crost.
On life’s great fea, is never wholly lost ;
Some power divine condufits her fwelling fails. And, of her due reward, fhe feldom fails.
The School for Rakes.
Born and bred In retirement and eaSe, at more than a hundred miles distance from the capital of England, my youthful days were past’d in one continued round of innocent amufe.-ments ; educated under the fostering wing of indulgent parents, whofe utmost wisties were their childrens happinest ; my inclinations never learnt to stray, but where my duty led them ; the fmiles of benignity fat upon my youthful countenance, every circumstance of life confpir’d to make me blest’d ;—1 had a brother whom I lov’d dearly as myfelf ; as our ages were nearly
equal
A M O R A L N O V E L. 105
equal, our study and purfuits were made So too, under that man, who was at once our tutor and our parent:—I ^ read the Clastics and learnt French with him, and in return, he was fome-times permitted to lake a lesson on the guittar with me; but as we were only SufferM to ufe theSe as amufements at our leifure hours, by thus being taught to consider in the light of indulgences, what were really edifying and ufeful studies, we of courfe made much more progrefs therein than if we had look’d upon them as infli6ted talks, which we were obliged to perform.
As my father’^s estate w'as not fufficient to enable him to bring up my brother independent of the world, he gave him leave to chufe his profession, when pitching on the army, he immediately bought him a commission in the first regiment of guards, and fent him to London, ta perform the duty which he ow’d his king and and country, not without many tears on both sidesji. at his departure.«—You may easily imagine, how much I felt for the lofs of a brother, whom I lov’d with fuch tendernefs; but as he promis’d to write to me frequently, by the alternate assistance of my books and my guittar, I made a Shift at least to Support the appearance of tolerable Spirits; tho’ I will own, I felt this blow more Severely than I dat’d then confefs;—but as the All-wife Being never does any thing without proposing Some end thereby, fo this had one E 5,	great
po6 A M O R A L N O V E L.
great good attending iC; for as I have fihce found by fatal experience, that I was born to undergo many misfortunes,—*this. So early in life,. Serv’d to inure me to what I Since have Suffer’d;; and what was then the caufe of So much afflidfi-onto me, on a cool retrofpedfion, appears to-be nothing,, in comparison of what I since, have, felt for thus we always Swell our prefent pain, tilhfome Severer grief arrives, which ssiews what’s past, without extenuation or increafe, irii its true light.
I thus give you the history of my family, be» caufe in my brother’s, my own is included.— About a year after his departure, he inform’d us by letter, of.an intended visit, having obtain’d leave of abfencefor three months; and that he ihould bring a particular acquaintance, who was a brother officer, with him:—accordingly, in a few days he arriv’d, attended by his friend,, whofe name, was Modisti : this gentleman, who was a lieutenant as well as my brother. Seem’d* by nature form’d to pleafe the women; had I faid for their destruction, my own circumstances-would too fatally justify the expression, as I can with truth affirm, that I have never felt the in- . fiuence of joy, since first I knew him ; but still I don’t repent of my acquaintance ; for wherefo-«ver he is, may heav’n prote^f him!—he had not been long at my father’s, before his behaviour too plainly convinc’d me of his Sentiments ; in short he Soon found an opportunity of declaring
A MORAL N O V E L. loyt
ing his paffion for me, in the warmest terms ; nor will I pretend to play the hypocrite, by faying I was difpleas’d at it: and though prudence (as he had no fortune, but the income of his commistion) would not fuffer me to receive his addresses openly, as it would have been madnefs in me, to have imagin’d that my father ever would agree to the match, yet in private I gave him all the encouragement that modesty would allow of, or his generosity have alk’d*.
I was now one-and-twenty and had just receiv’d a ihoufand pounds left me by an uncle, and which was all the fortune I had independent of my father ; and, in short. Sir, my affedfion for him was fo deeply rooted, that he too easily prevail’d upon me to fly from the best of parents, and receive him as a hushand :—he theri wrote to my brother, acquainting him therewith, , and desiring him to break the aflFair to my father, and intreat his forgivenefs ; after which < we proceeded to London, where we waited for feme time, in daily expefifation of an anfwer, but were amaz’d to find ourfelves difappointed, efpecially as Mr. Modish had theprecaution to desire my brother to diredt to him at a certain coffee-houfe ; thither he went every day, but every day had the mortification of a disappointment :—and. although my hushand’s regard for me. Seem’d every moment to increafe ; in Such ; a situation, I v.as far from being happy the consideration of being neglectfully, deferted by
mj '
io8 AMORAL NOVEL, my parents, and all that my foul held dear in the world, except the partner of my heart, was too tormenting a thought for me not to be fenSibly afflided with.—We had been in town about two months, when the following misfortune happen’d to deprive me even of the pleafure which my hu(band’s company afforded.,
He was returning home one night from the coffee-houfe, about twelve o’clock, elevated in liquor, when a perfon from behind, gave him a flap on the shoulder.—Imagining he was befet by foot-pads, turning Suddenly round, he fired one of the pistols which he always carried about him, and instantly Saw the perfon who had thus attack’d him, fall to the ground.—A croud of watchmen immediately assembled, drawn thither by the report of his pistol,-^but—good heavens I —what was his consternation, when he found the perfon he had sho-t, to be no other than my bro.-ther, and whofe flap on the shoulder, which was a mark of familiarity and affedlion, had been thus fatally mifconstrued.—Concluding that he had certainly kill’d him,, under a pretence of fetching a Surgeon he ran home, and informing me of this melancholy accident, took half my fortune, which luckily was in the houfe, and tenderly embracing me, hurried away to pre^ Serve himfelsi
As he fufpeisied, fo it happen’d, for my brother died in lefs than an hour, and rewards were
immediately
A M O R A L N O V E L. to9
immediately advertis’d for the apprehenSion of his murderer :—oh, Sir ! think what a situation this was ;-—in one fad hour depriv'd of all my future profpe£ts of felicity,-—my dearest brother dead my hustand siown I knew not where, and stigmatiz’d as his destroyer ;—hourly branded with the name of villain, for as no one knew the truth of this affair,, every time it was told, added to his difcredit, and it at last reach’d my father’s ears ; maim’d and villanousty wrested every way to uit the purpofes of avaricious relations ; So that all he heard was, that my huf-band was the murderer of his Son.”
According to the cruel expe6lat<ion of the malicious propagators of this report, he Soon died —»nor did my mother long Survive, both their ends being not a little hastened by this misfortune. Thus, Sir, was almost the whole family at once annihiliated, by an accidental error ; into which the best of men might easily have fab len.
In this accumulated distrefs, I had no friend to comfort or assist me, and though Mr. Modifh had promis’d to inform me of his fate, I still remain’d entirely ignorant thereof, having never once heard from him since his departure ; when, to crown all my mifery, I found myfelf with child :—although I had a pretty large fum of money lett, it was daily diminishing, and as I had no profpedt of getting more, I even then
began
510 A MORAL NOVEL.
began to anticipate the tortures of poverty.—At the ufual timcj I was brought to bed of a daughter ; and, about six weeks after nay delivery, had ? the luck of meeting with a lady, who had generosity enough to believe my story, and humanity enough to promife to astist me ; nor did stie fail to keep her word : in a few days after, she told ^ me that a widow lady, to whom she had mention’d my misfortunes, had kindly offer’d to^ take me with her to Ireland as a companion, but . that my having a child was an unfurmountable ; obstacle,—and now, Sir, shall I not forfeit your» good opinion ? by owning, that by the melancholy profpe6l before me, I was drove to make -ufe of she follo'wing stratagem having frequently heard your character for humanity ex— toll’d, I convey’d my little dading to a place where I fancied you were fure of feeing her, . with a paper pinned upon her breast, on which
I wrote thefe words.-Unkjiozvn Jiranger, who-
footer than art that Jind’Ji this Jueklefs babci Put not your ears againji the tender cries of youthful innocence^ but pityy cherijh, and receive here, in return for vohiehy Pe will Jar o’’erpay your gene--rous carcy by her endearing prattle.-—Having heard, that according to my expectations, you had taken her intOi your houfe, I was much pleas’d at the fuccefs of my fcheme, , and with joy Set out for Ireland, though it was not a little allay’d, by my never having heard from Mr. Modish, who had now been gone near a year in short, ^ Sir,,not to trouble you with any unnecessary
A" MORAL NOVEL, m,
necessary particulars, I remain’d here with my patronefs, till her death, which happen’d about half a year ago, when in return for my Services,. , fhe left me her whole fortune, amouMting to. near ten thoufand pounds ; and being thereby put into a station of, life, fuperior to my utmost wifhes, I iwas preparing, to fet out for England, to make enquiries after my daughter, when "learnt accidentally from this gentleman, what was her Situation m the world : and now. Sir, , there is nothing wanting to, complete my felicity, but Some tidings of Mr. Modilh, of whoSe fate I am entirely ignorant, though he,has-been abfent near twenty years.,
G H A P. XXII.
The boast of heraldry, the pomp of power.
And all that honours, all that wealth e’er gavej> , Await alike: the inevitable hour ;
The paths of glory lead but to the grave.
GRAy’s Elegy.
Thu S, continued Sir Harry, did Mrs.* Modisti fully Satisfy, me, with regard to her being the real parent of my adopted ^mily ;
I therefore brought her with me to Lo/idon,.. where stie.now is,,and whither i stonst doubt yon .
wiB
lift A M O R A L N O V E L.
will joyfully accompany me to-morrow, to pay your duty to a woman who is every way deferv-ing the title of your mother.—And altho% my .ffimily, you are not my niece, nevertheless we are related,, as I find your father was brother tOi tny coufin Modifh, whom you have often Seen and with whom (if the reader will revert to the fourth chapter) he will find Sir Harry had a diS-courSe on the Subje6l: of his behaviour to iEmily when he endeavoured to diffuade him from the: noble and humane reSolution that he had made. —■How little did he therr know he was arguing
against his own niece!----1 have alSo (added
Sir Harry) fince my return, on enquiring of my couSin concerning the fate of bis brother, heard that he was lost in his passage to Italy ; for w’hieh place he had embarked to avoid the officers of justice.—As his marriage was an intire Secret, he-never had an opportunity of communicating it to. his brother, who was then abroad ; and who, fill my information, never had the least fuSpieion thereof.----
On observing that Mrm\y could not refrain from tears, at hearing the fate of that man to whom stie owed her birth ; he Said,—“ Indeed, my dear, this Sorrow is unnecessary, as you ** never knew the perSon whole loSs you are la-menting; and, as heaven has. been kind enough “ to restore to you a parent, who, I am lure,
** will perform every duty, and amply Supply the ‘‘ place of both.father and mother.—This, my
« ^mily.
A M O R A L N O V E L. 115
“ iEmily, was the only reafon why I deSired ** you to defer your marriage till after my re-. “ turn ; for, as you have now a parent to apply to, mine is but an assumed authority ; though “ I am convinced, Ihe will readily give her con-fent to every thing which may contribute to “ your happinefs.”——-
As Mr. Martin was now entirely delivered from thofe apprehenssons, which we hinted at above, he Soon recovered his ufual flow of Spirits ; and congratulated iEmily on her new acquisition, in terms of the greatest tendernefs; as did the rest of the family at Oak-hall; who were immediately made acquainted with this happy revolution.—-Even poor Maria feem’d to forget the caufe of her affliftion, and Ihare in the general joy.—The next morning Sir Harry fet out for London, attended by Martin and .ffimily, though not without being first made to promife, that they would return with Mrs. Modish, and there celebrate the nuptials of her daughter.
To defcribe the meeting between ./Emily and her mother, would require the efforts of a stronger pen, than my poor inexperience is master of; let it Suffice to fay, that each was highly pleafed with the acquisition of fo deferving a relation ; and that this lady readily confented to her daughter’s marriage with Mr. Martin, whom she from that > moment considered as her fon.——Sir Henry having generoussy prefented hk adopted child
with
ri4 A MORAL NOVEL.
with ten thoufand pounds, thefe happy peopk, accompanied by Mrs. Modish, returned to Sir Thcmas Hartry’s, where, in a short time, Mar-tin’s happinefs was completed, by being put itj-poffeffion of the truly amiable iEmily.
Although Maria, out of regard for her friendy could not refufe being prefent at the wedding,, the reader may imagine how much this renew’d her grief; the thoughts of having lately been tt>-the fame church, on fo different an occasson, and the melancholy circumstances attending it; all Serv’d to revive that Sorrow, the first tumults of which were as yet Scarcely fubSided ; . and though her breast at this juncture, was truly the feat of mourning and. astli^Stion,, on her face she. wore apparent marks of joy thus then, alf were, or
at least feemed happy.-Sincerity and affedflon
here went hand in hand, and cordially ertl-brac’d each other:—but mark the mutability of all human affairs,—oh, vaip,man L who can con-troul his fate? or dare to fay,—Vo-rworrow /r my own The joy that this family might truly boast,—and the happinefs which fate feemed to have provided for them, for many years to come, were at once cruelly destroyed, by an accident as unforefeen, as unprovided for...
The day after their marriage,., AEmily pro-pofed a ride, wshich the unfortunate Martin too readtly acquiefeed in ;. and’they were fcarce got ^.hundred yards from the houfe, before her horfc
took
A MORAL NOVEL. 115 took fright at Some linen hanging on a hedge ;
. when, not being the most expert horfe-woman, she lost her feat, and was thrown with the most violent force, with her head against the foot of a tree, from thence she was taken up, and carried home fpeechlefs:—On an examination of the wound by a furgeon, he declared it to be mortal.—Would to heav’n his report had been fallacious !—but as he foretold, in a few hours, the fairest flower which earth ever Saw, or heav’n ever destroyed, departed from a place where her felicity was but just begun !.. -■■ Oh Providence f how unsearchable are all thy ways, when the very means that we contrive for our amufements,, are thus conducive to our destruQion ?—-for, to* add to the poignancy, of, this misfortune, Martin was the first who, in order to amufo :®hiily, h'adi infisted on her learning to ride.—How little did he then imagine the fatal confequences, which-were one day doom’d to attend it 1-—Common griefs admit of common palliative cpufolations but alas, poor^ Martin ! who shalHpeak comfort to afflidfioB great as thine ?-r-ia one fad hour depriv’d of wife,-r- bride,—mistrefs.-----r-Let the
Stoic, pamper’d with delicacies, from his bed of down, defpife the pinching gripes attendant upon poverty ;-r-then let hirn frnile at misfortunes, and defy their point ;-~-.but shew me the man who, when the preffing hand of stern adverSity is on him, will talk thus ; who, when his heart is fick with grief, and his eyes dim with tears,, can stisti
preferve;-
ii6 A M O R A L N O V E L.
preferve his refolution, and I will worfhip him like a defcended angel.
CHAP. XXIII.
Can storied urn, or animated bust.
Back to its manfion call the fleeting breath ?
Can honour’s voice provoke the silent dust ?
Or flatt’ry Sooth the dull cold ear of death ?
Gray’s Elegy.
SURE never yet was found fuch a fcene of complicated woe as we here meet with at Oak-hall!—at once dash’d from the heighth of prosperity and happinefsj to the lowest step of mifery, that even premeditated malice could have contrived.—Poor Mrs. Modish !—no Sooner to be Sensible of the foul-taught feelings of parental love, but thus to be obliged to feel the pangs of an eternal Separation!—See this, ye vain ones of the world, and learn how little value you should fet upon your prefent happinefs, when you are thus liable every minute to be deprived thereof.— But to proceed.
The affli£Hon of the company at Sir Thomas Hartry’s on this occasion, beggars all defcription. —When their first shock was a L'ttle over. Sir Henry removed Mrs. Modish from a place, where
every
A M O R A L N O V E L. 117
every objeQ; Served but to renew her grief, by reminding her of her departed /Emily ; but Martin infisted on staying there, to mingle his tears with thofe of the whole neighbourhood, till after her interment.—As this was too extraordinary an affair long to remain Secret; the whole country were Soon in tears, for the fate of the most deserving woman of her early age.—This blow, added to thofe shocks she had lately received, had nearly been the occasion of Maria’s relapfe ; but, by the friendly conversation’ of Charlotte, her mind was diverted from the continual contemplation of thofe things which occasion’d her grief.
Time, that allievates most Sorrows, feefnM to increafe that of Martin, who now determin’d to re-visit London, a month having elaps’d since the burial of his iEmily ; during which time he had never fail’d daily watering her grave with his tears.—The evening before his departure, he went there alone ; ancl, having fpent fome time in the contemplation of that Spot, which contained all that his ravish’d foul had once held dear, the following words burst fpontaneoufly from his lips : ** Hush’d be each breeze !—ye “ warblers stop your throats,—for—she is gone !
—the fairest flower of the creation is destroyed! *( ——Death, like an untimely frost, has nipp’d " thofe beauties, which lately - shone with fuch
distinguish’d excellence !-1 never more shall
** hear the music of that voice,—that form no ‘	more
«
ii8 A MORAL NOVEL, more stiall blefs my longing eyes 1—Lay light upon her breast,—*" ye turf,—happier there-“ in than I:—all nature’s joyful Save myfelf alone. <c M.I wander infensible to all the fweets around me; unknowing, and unknown, like our first parents when drove out of Eden ; all that is ** past appears but like a dream, and all before me, dreary Solitude.- ■■ -Yet let me not « complain ; O Heav’n ! thy ways are just-;
thou gavest and thou takest away.^’—So Saying, he returned to the houfe ; and according to his defign, the next day Set out for London.— J will therefore now take my leave of fo melancholy a profpedl, and follow Mr. Melvill, whom I left in a post-chaife, on the road to Uoveri
CHAP. XXIV.
TThat paffion which harrows the foul.
By reafon we strive to remove ;
But reafon"s too weak to controul ^
A palTtpjn fo powerful as love.
The Opera of Tom Jones,
LTHOUiGH Melvill (as has been b^ore-related) had thus with the most noble refolu-» tjQn,hitrried from thefightof that perfon by whom* he:fan«iftd bimfelf fo muchiinjured;; yet like the^
famous
A MORAL NOVEL. iif
‘famous Greek of old, he bore the fatal arrow in his heart, and in an almost distrafl:ed state, arriv’d at Dover just as the packet was Setting fail for Calais, on which he embarked, and in a few >hours reaching the end of his voyage, from thence proceeded with the utmost rapidity to f’aris, where he had not long been, before the fatigue of travelling, to which he was So unac-•costorri’d, join’d to^his uneafineSs of mind about Maria, whom (however he might flatter himSelf) -he could not fo Soon forget ; threw him (as the reader has before heard) into a violent fever.
This was a most fhocking situation for fo young a traveller, confin’d to his bed in a sirange plac^ without an acquaintance to fpeak to, or a friend to give him any affisiance ; he had jusi learnt French enough (while a boy) to alk for what he wanted, but not to hold any converfation in the language; fo that (if I may be allow’d the ex-presiion) all the intercourfe he could have, was with his own thoughts, and indeed he there found full employment;—he repeatedly curs’d the day of his nativity, and oftner that of his firsi acquaintance with Maria, as all the kindnefs siie had hitherto shewn him, ferv’d but to make her infidelity appear the stronger, and in more detestable colours ; of which, he fometimes determin’d, on his recovery to return and accufe her; ^ but then he recollefted, this would rather ferve to increafe, than heal his wounds, for as he
wai
120 A M O R A L N O V E L.
was confcious, that she had still the firm pof-feffion of his heart, the thought of feeing her the wife of another, was more than he could bear.
During his illnefs, as his only amufement, he had recourfe to reading, but not understanding French Sufficiently to read in that language, and as the English books he there met with, were very indifferent, his studies gave him but little fatisfa€lion :—he by chance met with the following ode, with which he was highly delighted, as being fo conformable to himfelf.
/
ODE
A M O R A L NO V E L. 121
• ODE to DEATH.
I.
Oh death, thou gentle end of human pain.
Why is thy stroke So long delay’d ?
Why, to a wretch who breathes but to complain, Dost thou refuSe thy welcome aid ?
Still wilt thou fly the plaintive voice of woe ? And where thou’rt dreaded, only aim the blow.
II.
Oh leave, fantastick tyrant, leave The young, the gay, the happy, and the free, On them bestow a short reprieve.
And bend thy fatal shaft at me ;
The beauteous bride, or blooming heir,
Let thy reSistlefs arrow Spare,
And aim at this grief-wounded heart.
That Springs half-way to meet the welcome dart.
III.
Still must I view, with streaming eyes.
Another and another morn arife.
Are my days lengthen’d, to prolong my pain?
Enough of life’s distrefs I’ve feen,
A finish’d wretch in youth’s first bloom,
By early Sorrow, ripen’d for the tomb.
* The author does not prefent this ode to the pub-lick as his own, produdtion, but as one of the most beautiful pieces of detach’d poetry, he ever reniesn-bers to have met with.
VoL. I.	F	In
122 A MORAL NOVEL.
In this manner did he amufe himfelf during his illnefs, which happily was of no long duration, for being confcious that nature is her own physician, and, by having fair play, fooner or later will effeiQ: a cure, he fuffer’d her to take her regular courfe ; and in a few days got well enough to Satisfy his curiosity, by feeing every thing in Paris worthy the attention of a traveller: —he was a constant attendant at the comedy, the opera, and all publick places, in hopes by a diversity of entertainments, to forget Maria, and for the minute in which his mind was engaged by other objects, he Succeeded; but the instant be was alone, his thoughts, as if by instindl, were at Oak-hall, and painted her to him, laughing at his fufferings.
In this manner did he live for Some time, daily undergoing the most excruciating torments, till tir’d with the fame rotundity of amufements, which however pleasing, by repetition will at last grow-^ insipid, he refolved to visit Spain, and immediately made the necessary preparations for his jouritey; but before I remove my reader from Paris, I cannot help fnentioning an affair which, happened to our hero during his stay there.
Having occasion to hire a Servant, he desired the master of his hotel to recommend him one, and he accordingly the next morning introduc’d to him an Englissiman, who being a Ik’d by Mel-
vill
A MORAL NOVEL. 123
vill Several questions concerning his reaSons for thus leaving England, gave the following whimsical relation of his own life ; which, as he had a peculiar facetious manner of relating it, probably afforded more entertainment at the time, than my reader may now find in it.
CHAP. XXV.
To this one standard, make your just appeal. Here lies the golden Secret, learn to feel \
Or fool, or monarch, happy, ordistrest.
No a£tor pleafes, who is not poffesh
Lloyd’s Actor.
AS you cannot poffibly. Sir, difprove or contradiO; any thing a stranger Shall fay of himfelf, it were as eafy for me to make you believe I am the fon of a judge as not, and indeed fo I am ; of as just and excellent a one, as any in the three kingdomsof horfes,—I mean; for as I acknowledge that old-fashion’d virtue “ sincerity,” to be my charafteristic, I must confefs, that my father was ostler at a large inn on the north road, and my mother, chamber-maid in the fame houfe, both excellent in their re-fpedlive stations, I assure you ;—they no Sooner met, than they conceiv’d for each other a violent affe6Uon, the confequence of which was, that (he prov’d with child; but my father foon mak-F 2	ing
124 A MORAL NOVEL, ing her an honest, virtuous woman, this cha-ra6ter she has maintain’d ever Since, though I was born within two months after their marriage. —I was Sent to learn to read and write at a neighbouring charily-fchool, in which accomplishments, 1 made a Surprising progrefs; and having finish’d my education, began to astist my father in his bufinefs ; but this way of life, not at all fuiting my romantic indications, for, as I knew myfelf (from hearing others fay fo) to be a lad of parts, I could not hear to be obfcurely buried in a stable ; but afpir’d to much higher things: and, as a natural genius will never lie dormant, I gave very early proofs of mine, and proceeded with fuch rapidity and fuccefs, that at the age of fifteen, I was cast for tranfportation, for robbing a hen-roost ; but the judge taking pity of my youth, revers’d the Sentence, and order’d me to be whipp’d ; after which correction, I was remanded to my old employment of ^“ a quarter or half a peck,”—“ eight-pence “ half-penny,”—and'—“ 1 hope you’ll remember “ the ostler. Sir,”—In which way of life, I continu’d for fome time, and being tir’d with bootlefs prayers to my father, that he would fuffer me to visit London, now determin’d to wait no longer for his permlstlon,^ which he stUl obstinately refus’d.
This 1 was urg’d to, not only from a natural desire to fee the world, but from having follow’d his example; in short, a girl in the town was,
or
A M O A R L NOVEL. 125 or at least Said Ihe was, with child by me, and as I had no reafon to doubt the truth of her alTertion, I thought flight the best method to efcape the officers of justice, for whom I had conceiv’d a particular aversion, ever since the age of fifteen.
I had no fooner projected this glorious Scheme, than I put it into execution, and with a fmall stock of cloaths, and lefs money, Set out early one morning, without taking leave of any one except my Dulcinea, who, with tears in her eyes, (poor giii) begg’d me to desist from my intention ; but in vain.-—I was adamant'—steel— the glorious purpofe of my mind was fix’d, nor Was I to be diverted from it, by the prayers and intreaties of a filly girl,.
My violent Inclination to fee the world, made me with eafe Support the fatigue of my first day’s journey ; but, in Spite of ev’ry thing, nature will have her courSe : and I was very near finking beneath my burthen on the Second. My situation was truly critical; I longed to return, but my courage, forbad it; to proceed was dangerous ; but, as abSolute necessity obliged me to fix on Something, I was forced to put on the face of intrepidity, and proceed with all the strength and fpeed I was master of: tho’, notwithstanding my utmost endeavours, 1 could not reach the place I had destin’d for my that night’s residence; but falling short of it, at Some miles distance in F 3	the
126 A M O R A L N O V E L.
the Ikirts of a large town, juft made fhift to crawl to a neighbouring barn ; on entering which, I was almost struck dumb with astonish-ment at what I faw before me. In a corner, on one poor melancholy trufs of straw, fat a tall, genteelish woman; in her hands she held an old Scarlet coat, lin’d with blue, of which she had turn’d the inside out ; and was industriousty trimming it with white paper, in fo artful a manner, as ingenuousty to conceal all the patches, which, from length of time, and constant wear, were pretty numerous: near her was another woman, more inclining to the girl, in whofe face were strongly pi6tur’d all the marks of vanity: nor did her adiions contradi6t my fufpici-ons; as she was washing about ten or a dozen pieces of old lace, and Some other ornamental trifles, which she afterwards very curiousty joined together, and made into a most Superb head-drefs. Splendidly decorated with biti of Bristol-stone, glaSs, &c. thinly fcattered to make up a Low, to pleafe that part of the world, whofe Sole ambition is to feast their sight. Not far from them, on the ground, lay two men, fast lock’d in stumber, forgetting mifery ; and, at a little distance, fat a man and a woman; who, by the difmal light of a single Solitary candle, were reading out of the Same book: at the other end of the barn, was a perSon very bufy in ornamenting and sitting up, what I afterwards found to be the stage, where kings and princes march’d in all theatric pomp; though at that time it was
occupied
A MORAL NOVEL. 127 occupied on one side, by a cow and a calf, and on the other, by two jack-alTes, Notwithstanding I had Seen So very little of the world, I did not want to be informed, that thefe were a company of strolling comedians, preparing for their next night’s talk. In a fupplicating tone, I told them my story, and begg’d leave to take up my lodging there for one night; they very humanely granted my request ; and having refrelhed me in a Sparing manner on bread and cheefe, di-refted me to a vacant corner of the barn, where I lay down ; and, overcome with my excestive fatigue, foon fell asteep; ift which happy state I had been Some hours, when I was awaked by a perfon crying in a hoarfe voice, Wby^ this it 'Well,—“this is blo’vu for blow.—Where ! where / interrupted I, rising in a fright, imagining that fome-body was fighting, and that this perfon was thus exprestlng his approbation of it; but they foon convinced me of my error, by informing me, that Mr. Rantum was only rehearsing the part of Zanga in the Revenge ; w'hich play was to be performed that evening (as the written bills fpecified) by a company of performers from the theatres royal.
As I was naturally of a volatile disposition, the drollery and variety of thefe people’s lives pleas’d me fo much that I longed to become one of them; and therefore informed them; that 1 fhould be glad to be engaged as a perfon, willing to do every thing in his power; and having F 4	in
128 A M O R A L N O V E L. in a Ihorl time agreed on the terms, I was inrol-led one of the company, with all the ufual forms. Agreeable to their defign, the Revenge was that evening perform’d, with univerfal applaufe : the charadters were, in general, what they call, well Supported ; but Zanga in particular, which Mr. Rantum play’d, to the administration of ihofe who Seem’d to understand him, and the utter astonishment of thofe who did not: he had for-merly been at London, in Drury Lane Theatre, where he was employed in the charadlers of footmen, guards, &c. and I am even credibly informed, that he once play’d the part of a bear in a pantomime ; but, be that as it may, it is certain that he still retained fo high an opinion of the London afilors, that he copied one of them very minutely in the charaQ;er of Zanga, as Some critics faid, and roar’d fo very loud, that he did not thoroughly recover the ufe of his Speech for three days afterwards.
There now open’d to me fresh Scenes every day, of which I had not before (as indeed how should I) the least idea.—To recount to you the various intrigues that now prefented themfelves, especially the amorous advances of Mrs. Faint-well, who took pains to inform me, that every young man who had a mind to Succeed, should form a connexion with Some lady ol merit in the company ; it would perhaps appear the effeft of vanity ; though most certainly Mrs. Faintwell, who was old enough to be my mother, and who had postested eight real or nominal hushands,
absolutely
A MORAL NOVEL. 129
absolutely propofed going by my name, that we might live and taste the Sweets, without the inconvenience of matrimony to tell alfo the various fhifts we were obliged to make, in the performance of our pieces, would appear romance ; however,.we gain’d considerable applaufe wherever we went ; I fay, we, becaufe I belonged to the company ; though hitherto I had done nothing more than Sweep the stage, fnuff the candles, fwell’d the train of a theatric prince, and walked in a white stieet in Juliet’s funeral procef-sion. I pin’d with envy, at feeing the applaufe and fuccefs others met with, while I with my shining talents remain’d in difmal obfcurity. However, confcious of my own abilities, I began to think of appearing in Some more elevated station ; and accordingly confulted Mr. Rantum: of whom, before I proceed, it may be proper to fay Something ; the property of Some daubed canvafs, and tarnished tinfel cloaths, fo much increased the natural pride of this important per-fon, that he constdered and ufed the members of his company as staves ; thieves to the men, and expreshons equally grofs, to the women, were common with him ; and a very flight degree of: contradidlion could roufe him to real knockdown arguments with his fist ; Supposing him-r^ Self the best afitor upon earth, he could not bear the least appearance of a flight; which occafi-r oned him once; in the character of Alexander, to deprive Hephestion of a tooth, for Supposing he laughed at him ; he was as Selfish as proud, and F 5	took.
130 A MORAL NOVEL.
took care, even when there was tolerable fuccefs, to glean So much, under pretence of stock-debt, that the company were very little above begging ; which occasioned them to be very comical in tragedy, and fad in comedy.
Upon application to our manager, he readily granted my request ; desiring to know what I chofe to come out in. Being naturally of an aS-piring disposition, and not in the least doubting my tragical powers, I had pre-refolved, like the fun from behind an obScuring cloud, to break forth more glorious, for having been thus concealed ; and therefore pitch’d upon Jachimo, for my first attempt : Mr. Rantum faid, that I knew Cymbeline to be a play for which they were not at all prepared; and which would inevitably put them to great inconveniencies in the performance ; but that having conceived a regard for me, he would oblige me, by having it represented ; and as an additional proof he would play Leonatus Posthumus.----The parts there-
fore were accordingly cast, and Mr. Rantum very kindly gave me Some instru6tions, relative to my attitudes, voice, ^c.
In lefs than a fortnight we were all ready for the rehearfal: and the bills gave notice of “ Cymbeline to be perform’d, the part of Ja-« chimo by a young gentleman, being his first “ appearance on any stage.”
This
A MORAL NOVEL. 131
This ofcourfe filled the theatre, alias the barn with all the neighbouring families : and as the fatal hour drew nigh, when all my future fame w'as to be laid at stake, I felt myfelf in a Situation not to be defcribed.—The warning bell at length ringing,—I appear’d,—and the houfe le-eehoed with applaufe : I went through the first a£l; as well as could be expelled ; but when I stole an inestimable bracelet of black riband from Imogen’s arm, who was repofed on a white sheet, laid over the shelleton box ufed in pantomime: the fuccefs I met with, was inexpreffible, beyond my most Sanguine expectations : her bed chamber indeed, did not exaCtly anSwer that inimitable description given of it, by the immortal Shakefpeare ; the hangings were not silver’d silk, proud Cleopatra when she met her Roman, but the patch work of the wainfcoat was concealed from enquiring eyes, by an old piece of tapestry, beautifully defcribing the history of Saint George and the Dragon; thus you fee, we endeavoured to come as near the original as pofllble : and our audience being kind enough, to take the will for the deed, the whole went off with an uncommon eclat.
And give me leave to obferve, that till within thefe two years, when the managers of Covent Garden, have very judiciousty had one painted on purpofe; I have frequently known a Scene exhibited in this excellent play, which had no more refemblance to the description given of it,
in
32 A MORAL NOVEL.
in the SabSequent aO:, than that which our itinerant company was obliged to make ufe of: ne-ceffity indeed was plea Sufficient for them ; but Surely at the theatres royal, it is So great an absurdity, and So glaring an affront offered to the understanding of the publick, as Scarcely to be overlooked, or forgiven by any audience ; for when we hear thefe beautiful lines,
—............. "	■■ I I . It was hang’d
With tapestry of Silver’d filk ; the story I^roud Cleopatra, when fhe met her Roman,
And Cyndus fwell’d above the banks, or for The prefs csi boats, or pride, a piece of work. So bravely done, So rich, that it did strive,
In vvcrkmanffiip and value ; which I wonder’d Could be fo rarely, and exactly wrought,
Since the true life.on’t was———-
Cymbeline.
I fay Sir, when we hear this glorious and animated description, we naturally refer our ideas,, to the Scene of which it is Spoken but which upon recolle£fion,,, we fhall find, w'as Something ridiculoully trifling, and foreign to the purpofe. but to proceed,—in the battle Scene, I like-wife gain’d great honour, when struck with the horrors of a guilty confcience ; my nervelefs arm refus’d its office, and obliged rne to yield to Posthumus, his Romisti weeds difguis’d by a carter’s frock : but at the conclusion, I will not fay 1 deferv’d, but I will venture to affure you,
that
A MORAL NOVEL. 833 that I was loaded with vast applaufe ; the men approv’d, and the women Said I was quite a charming creature : which to do Mr. Rantum justice, I must attribute to his teaching me the full ufe of my lungs, which were naturally strong, diSmifs’d me with their ecchoing hands.
Thus you See on what trifling, insignificant points, depends the fame of an a£ior, whofe profestion is of all others, the most arduous and uncertain.
As I Succeeded So happily in my first attempt; you may be Sure I did not stop there ; and' thinking (no doubt) that my comic powers, were equally good with my tragic : I determin’d my next appearance stiould be in comedy ; when' fixing on Sir Harry Beagle, in the Jealous Wife, for my coup Fejfaiy came off as well as I had done in Jachimo; though to do my audience justice, 1 must own, that here for once in their lives, they were pleas’d with, and gave due praife to simple nature ; for having been bred in a stable the greatest part of my life,, the fmack of my whip, (which alone gain’d me great applaufe,) had from constant custom, become So habitual, that very little art was requir’d to Support the charadter in a forcible m.anner.
Not to take up too much of your time, I appeared in a variety of charadfers, and by an attention to Such trifling particularities, gained all
the
J34 A MORAL NOVEL.
the applaufe I wilhM for and much more than I really deferved ; however entering into a quarrel to Support the confequence of my old lady, who at the age of fifty-six, with a; most corpulent figure, wanted to play Juliet, and other girlish parts ; Mr. Rantum and I decided the matter by a bruising match, in which I came of vifitorious, but the vanquished manager took his revenge by discharging me, and being hissed out of every company I afterwards attempted, it became necessary to accept the place of valet de chambre to a gentleman who was coming over to Paris ; and where I had no doubt of finding employment; but being discharged by my master for attending the comedy instead of him ; to my great mortification I ams now convinc’d, that the French encourage no> poor but their own ; which has obliged me thus to offer my ferviees to you, Sir, and by a pretty, thorough knowledge of that great city, I hope to prove myfelf very ufefuh
End of the first Volume.
FEMALE FRIENDSHIP 2
O R T H E
INNOCENT SUFFERER.
A
MORAL NOVEL.
VOLUME THE SECOND.
** Virtue alone is happinefs below,
“ And our best knowledge is, ourfelves to know **
DUBLIN:
Printed for J. Williams, J. Porter, and T. Walker. Mdcclxx.
K/i. >i :i * • u i'* <i *':'. ^ ri ' ji "■ L i
n
.\ ic s o i<i ,1 S| sr
1
i t r >	■	..S'	^ r i	. .	. . . 4. ' ^ ^
,v,-:-!•’ :	-j. - yr ^xiyr: ’* •» '
'■ ■..■*'■ C"	. ,i ;i;:.‘’>LvC. :! h.-'	•'
9' ' -. Cl v‘- ' ^ S ;j
V ■.	;•■;	*v
"*	N '.-'.''.. *■
? • \
: Li I L ti N	T
!_ :;; -.': " S C -L ’ : . H O -S 'i " - ’ ''I
i",..	- •: a ' f . 1'
I <f|J>,||5><5l&<SiS>l
#	k&J*’ k^jiT k&k i|
#	'I
FEMALE FRIENDSHIP-.
OR THE
INNOCENT SUFFERER.
/
CHAP. XXVI.
Shew me the mau
That can administer to minds difeas’d.
Pluck from the memory a rooted Sorrow,
Raz-e out the written troubles of the brain ;
And with Some fweet oblivious antidote,
Cleanfe the full bofom of that perilous stuff Which weighs upon the heart.
Macbeth.
UR burlefque theatric hero, ha-
SQ ^ ving finifhed his narrative ; Mel-^ vilt engaged him as a kind of guide. During his stay at Paris, which was about three weeks, but prudently considering him as one of thofe who know too much of low life to be trusted, difmiffed him Vol.il	on
138 A M O R A L N O V E L.
on Setting out for the capital of Spain ; on his arrival at Madrid, our discontented traveller hired lodgings in one of the most capital streets, and by frequenting all public places Soon contrasted a larger Sphere of acquaintance than Spanish referve, efpecially to foreigners. Seemed to admit; however he avoided any particular intimacy except with Don Carlos, who was the only fon-of a grandee and of one of the most refpeSta* ble families in that kingdom. This young gentleman was about two and twenty years of age, handfome in perfon, elegant in appearance, modest in behaviour, and undaunted in danger, constant in friendship, fensible, charitable and generous ; No wonder that with thefe quafffecati-ons Melvill and he contracted a Sympathetic and mutual esteem for each other, which in a short time grew into the most disinterested friendship.
Don Pelajo, (the name of Don Carlos’s father) had formerly been in the wars, where he had distinguished himfelf much for his bravery ; he was judicious, brave, and prudent : polite and affable to ihofe who were acquainted wnth him, but to strangers appeared to have the national haughtinefs stamped upon his deportment; yet even then he rather created refpefil: than difgust, he married when very young, but inheriting rather too much of the Spanish jealoufy, his wife led not the happiest life, and left him at the age of twenty nine, a widower with two children, (viz.) a Son and a daughter," what the former was
the
A MORAL NOVEL. 139
the reader has already heard, I will now as near as I am able, draw the picture of his daughter Juliana; who when Melvill first Saw her, was . about eighteen years of age. Her lize of a delicate medium, her complexion fo beautiful that had it not been the fame from her youth, malicious fcandal, would have faid it was artificial, her perfon was genteel, her hair and eye-brows of a beautiful brown, the former curling in ringlets, over her ivory neck, feemed like a gorgeous net, to entrap the heart of all beholders, the latter formed two exa£t bows over her large blue eyes, which very few ever dared to look on twice, and her teeth (to borrow an expression from a favourite author) were like polished ivory Set in a coral bed. Thefe perfonal accomplishments joined to a good natural understanding, much improved by art, made the lovely Juliana,
, the most accomplished young lady in Madrid.
Such were the father and daughter, to whom Don Carlos introduced Melvill as one of his most particular friends, fuch was the family by which our hero was much caressed, and in whofe acquaintance he thought himfelf extremely happy.
Don Pelajo gave him a general invitation to his houfe, which to rid himfelf of thofe difagree-able thoughts concerning Maria, that he knew would intrude upon folitude, he cordially accepted and made almost constant ufe of: Don Carlos and he were Scarce ever aSunder, as instead
of
' ' )
140 AMORAL NOVEL.
of calling each other, every time they met, gave an additional fatisfadtion to both, always finding that reciprocal fatisfa£lion when together, which fenfible men must meet with in converfing with perfons of equal knowledge and delicacy.
Though in alt their intercourfes Melvill thought himfelf happy, still there was a certain Ie nefcaii quoi in his countenance, that plainly stiewed he was not lo ; Don Carlos could not avoid observing this uneaSinefs ; the real caufe of which the reader know's ; and with all the ten-dernefs of affedlion, inSisted on being acquainted therewith ; Melvill could refuSe nothing to fo dear a friend, and therefore informing him of the whole affair concluded with his determined resolution to forget her, in which he has not a. little strengthened by the Salutary advice of his fecond felf, for fo he frequently called Don Carlos.
Juliana, though young, had received Several offers from men of leading family and fortune, but const:ious that her own estate must one day be very confiderable, fhe thought herfelf thereby endowed with an undoubted right, to pleafe herfelf in fo momentous a choice ; at least fuch were the argument which her own mind furnisti-ed her with, to paliate what many deemed imprudence though the real truth was no other, than that her time was not yet come, fhe as vet never Seen any one for whom fhe felt a ten*
der
A MORAL NOVEL. 141
der partiality, but alas ! of how’ fhort a duration was her enjoyment of this pleafing indifference ; for on her first introduction to Melvill, (he was . Seized with a ferifation her heart had hitherto been an entire stranger to, her Spirits were fo fluttered and her whole frame fo difordered, that it was with difficulty fhe made any return to the many compliments which he paid her, and although when he took his leave, her head was fo disturbed, with the thoughts of this English stranger, as totally to destroy her nights rest, still young and unikil'led in ail the arts of love, she could astign no reafon for the unufual palpi-■tation of her heart; though her eyes always Sparkled with an additional fatisfaClion when in his company, and as very few days pasted in which she had not this pleafure ; love had made a great progrefs in her affeCtions, before she knew . it by any other name, than that of “ regard for fo dear a friend of her brother’s.’*
Admiring and admired, our hero would have been completely happy, had not that felicity (as I before Said) been destroyed by the thoughts of the Seemingly perfidious Maria, who in Spite of him-felf, wa-s always the fubjedl of his private meditations, and although to all outward appearance, he Seemed perfedlly eafy and compofed, still he pined inwardly, and would frequently exclaim, “ Wretch that I am, why was I ever fool enough to declare my pastion for a worthlefs woman, *'■ who must now laugh at and deSpife me for my
“ folly ?
142 A M O R A L N O V E L.
“ folly ? Dissembling hypocrite ! thus cruelly at one blow to blast my happinefs for ever, just too when I had figured to myfelf profpeds of “ felicity for many years to come; as an additi-“ onal mifery must I still be doomed to doat up-" on a woman, who in open violation of all the ** rules of truth and hcoo.ir, has after the most <* folemn promifes, devoted herfelf to another.
No! since she has thus forfeited all right of « pretension to my esteem, I can or must endea-vour to banish her from my thoughts.*'
CHAP. XXVII.
Hence, bashful cunning,
I am your wife, if you will marry me ;
If not I’ll die your maid ; to be your fellow You may deny me; but I’ll be your Servant Whether you will or no.
The Tempest,
W. HI L E he was thus one day railing against the unfortunate Maria, Don Carlos, who through a flight partition had heard all he Said, unexpededly, entered the room, and taking his hand in the most affeftionate manner, “ Indeed (faid he) my dear friend, this must not be, you promifed to drive this English beauty from your mind> and from your Seeming tranquillity
A MORAL NOVEL. 14J
lity and compoSure, I flattered myfelf you had Succeeded, remember Harry, thofe wounds heal ill, which men do give themfelves-
Oh Don Carlos I (interrupted he) I had as you fay refolved to forget her, and firmly meant to keep my resolution, but alas t I find “ that I am unequal to the talk, that I have im-** poSed upon myfelf,——must I confefs to you, “ that I am not master of my own intents—that once amiable girl has Such an alcendancy over “ me ; that one thought of her destroys the no-** blest purpoSes of xny foul.— I cannot live with-out her, and as fate has cruelly thus placed her beyond my reach——my final infelicity is fealed.’*
For shame, for fhame 1 (cried Don Car-los) have you no fenfe of honour orrefentment of So deep an injury.—What when a woman has ufed you So shamefully—still to entertain a pafllon for her—roufe yourfelf and be in reali-“ ty the man you Seem; consider, if the falSe “ ungrateful idol of your heart by her ill ufage “ cannot provoke you to a retalliation, yet con-Sider I befeech you how criminal it is both in « religion and honour to cherish a paffion for another man’s wife.—Think but feriouflyof this and from my thorough knowledge of your heart, ‘‘ I am convinced you will manfully endeavour to forget her.—Promife me, that you will do all in your power towards it, and do not
“ thus
144 A MORAL NOVEL.
“ thus tamely. Suffer your paffions, to over-“ come your reafon.”
« Yes (cried Melvill) I am convinced—I fee the justneSs of your arguments, and am re-“ Solved, henceforth to abandon every confide-ration of Oak-hall.—Allansf let us attend your « father, who by this time waits for us.”
No (anfwered Don Carlos) I must first beg your ear for a few minutes, to Something I “ have to fay.”
His friend having bowed assent, he proceeded as follows :
I little apprehended, when first I commenc-ed an acquaintance with you that I should ever “ have So much occafion to repent thereof, nay do not imagine that it is on my own account, “ (feeing him look astonished) on the contrary I “ know no man, for whom I have a more Sm-** cere regard nay affeOiion, nor can any one « have more intrinSic merit, but I am forry, « very Sorry, for one perfon in this family, that you ever visited Madrid, as I have great “ reafon to fear, that she is thereby rendered « unhappy for life ; you cannot after what I have faid, be ignorant that I mean, the poor “ captivated Juliana ; I must deem her unfor-tunate though by no means culpable, as I do “ not at all wonder at an inexperienced, fenfible,.
ingenious
A MORAL NOVEL. 145
“ ingenious girl, fixing her affefitions though “ hastily on So deferving an objed ; from the first moment of your arrival, fhe admired you, and from her frequent interviews, loved, before “ she fcarcely knew by what name to title her “ regard ; from her behaviour, you furely must “ have fufpefled it; I did, and by the following « accident, difcovered that my fufpicions were " not groundlefs.—
You must have taken notice, that she is per-feftly acquainted with the English language, nor is she a bad proficient, either in the practical or compofitive parts of mufic, and the other day I was assured of her regard for you, by overhearing her Singing the following little Sonnet, to her guittar, both the mufic and poetry of which, are I find of her own composition.
I.
When Henry first my eyes admir’d,
I madly thought myfelf his friend ;
Too foon I found ’twas love infpir’d Thofe hopes on which my joys depend.
II.
Ah ! may my Henry grateful prove And make me gen’rous, kind returns;
So may that friendship, turn to love.
Which in his genial bofom burns ;
VoL. II.	G	III, Ju.
146 A MORAL NOVEL.
III.
Juliana then. Supremely bless ;
Shall by Sweet experience prove,
(Of evTy earthly charm poffefs’d)
Th’ angelic blifs of faithful love.
On hearing this, I taxed her with her weak-nefs (if it may fo be called.) By nature formed open and candid fhe difdains a falfhood of the flightest kind ; therefore generoussy confessed that she preferred Mr. Melvill to every man in the world, — and making me her confident; though she faid it muss call a blush into a maiden’s cheek, to own her love ; defired me to inform you thereof.
Here they were interrupted and Don Carlos was obliged abruptly to break the thread of his difcourfe.
• \
CHAP.
‘'I	H
A M O R A L N O V E L. 147
CHAP. XXVIII.
—— The worm of peace is Surety,
Surety Secure ; but modest doubt is call’d The beacon of the wife ; the tent that fearches To th’ bottom of the wound.—
Troilus and Cress id A.
ThE next time our two friends were alone, Don Carlos refumed his difcourfe from the former chapter.
ConScious (Said he) that your affeflions, were already pre-engaged, though on an undeferving objeQ;, I endeavoured to perfuade my sister to think no more of you, and to encourage her thereto, have (for which I hope you will pardon me) broken the facred bond of friendship; by informing her of your unhappy attachment to Maria, though but in part, as I did not mention any thing of her being already married, only assuring her, that your whole heart was fixed on a young lady in England.
Like you, my Henry, she was too much in love to hear reafon, and it was in vain, that I urged a favourite fentiment of her own to induce her to forget you——they never knew to love who knew to change.———I in vain alked her what she should think of you, were you thus dishonourable to transfer your affections from G 2	one
148 A M O R A L N O V E L.
one to the other ; it all signified nothing. But as you must from fatal experience, know the difficulty of overcoming a miSplaced affefifion, better than 1 can pretend to inform you ; I will fay no more upon the fubjedl.——-In short, she insisted on my declaring it to you, which (as she had been candid enough to confefs it) I could not refufe ; nor could I break my word with her, without adding thereto, the more flagrant crime of premeditated falshood. I have alfo (as I thought it my duty) informed my father of this affair, who would most joyfully accept of you for a Son in law ; I need not Surely add, what I hope you are already convinced of, that I should be highly pleafed to join the more endearing name of brother, to that of friend— but I fear it will never be—all that I can now add, is, that I am Sorry poor Juliana’s happineSs depends upon your anSwer, as I think, I too plainly read it, in your face.
While Don Carlos was thus fpeaking, Mel-vill stood in the greatest perplexity, undetermined what to reply, but finding his friend was waiting for an anfwer, as the only reSource, he begged Some time to consider of So friendly a propofal and promiSed to inform him of his resolution, in writing, the enSuing day, after which, they hurried to their ufual gay companions, whoSe vivacity however was not able to efface the gloom, which she above conversation had Spread upon Melvill "s countenance ;
and
A MORAL NOVEL. 149 and when he retired to his bed, it was without the least inclination to steep.
He lay ruminating the greatest part of the night on the buSinefs of the fubfequent day, fo delightful a profpeft was not eaSily renounced —— A beautiful virtuous young lady with an immenfe fortune, were strong temptations for a man in his circumstances, fo very ill ufed too by that woman where he had garnered up his heart. — All thefe were great incitements to him to refolve to abandon Maria for ever and marry Juliana ; but then the thought of entering into fuch an engagement, when he was convinced how firmly his affediions were otherwife fixed ; wounded his confcience as a man of honour and integrity, far too fenfibly to Suffer him to commit fo bafe an adion.
After a long and violent confli^; he determined to make this Sacrifice to Maria ; in which he was not a little strengthened, by the first gleam of hope that he had entertained Since his departure, and which (hot acrofs his mind presenting her to his view in her original Simplicity and virtue.
Oh the extatic thought! but alas I it was but the glimmering of a tranfient ray, which even the most wretched will Sometimes entertain ; and which like the burning taper’s light, G-j	will
150 A M O R A L N O V E L.
will be the most apparent, where our darknefs and defpair are in the extreme.
A drowning man will catch at every straw. However be that as it may, it fixed him firmly in her favour, and he had the fatisfafilory con-fcioufnefs of having afited right, and in confe-quence thereof wrote the next morning as follows.
Dear Carlos,
THE honour you intend me, by an alliance to your family, calls for my warmest and most grateful acknowledgments ; permit me, there- ^ fore, to assure you, that I (hall always regard it, as a pieafing testimony of your friendlhip and esteem ; though, at the fame time, I must in-treat you to excufe me, if, for Several reafons,
I beg leave to decline your friendly offer; for, altho’ I know no family, of whofe affinity I Should be more proud, having a great value for Don Pelajo and yourfelf; and a most fincere regard for the lovely Juliana; still, as a great deal beyond esteem is necessary to render the marriage state happy ; and, as by my affefilions being otherwife unfortunately placed, your sister will be deprived of that love which every man ought to have for his wife; I cannot be bafe enough, from the paltry consideration of money, or the fuppofed Spirit of revenge, to make a
worthy
A MORAL NOVE L. 151 worthy woman unhappy, by giving her my hand without my heart.
I must therefore with the generous Juliana, all the felicity this world can afford, with fome more deferving man: — but, lest my prefence should be fuel to her unhappy passion, I will in a few days remove from Madrid, that abfencc may help to effedl her cure.
Believe me to be, dear Carlos, much shocked at a Separation from Such estimable Society; allow me to have a due fenfe of the honour and happinefs intended me; and view me as cne, who wall always be proud to stibScribe himfelf.
Your very affeffionate friend,
Henry Mel v ill.
On receipt of the above, Don Carlos hastened to his friend, to thank him for his kind and prudent intentions, with regard to quitting Madrid; and, at the fame time, inSisted on his giving up all thoughts thereof: “ as (added he)
It can anfwer no end, Juliana being in a few “ days going to Spend fome months whth a re-“ lation in the country; you must therefore «abfent yourfelf stem my father’s till then; “ and, in the mean time. I’ll inform her of your “ anfweXi”—which he accordingly did.
G 4	This
152 A MORAL NOVEL.
This truly amiable girl bore the difappoint-ment of her hopes and wilhes heroically ; and only replied, “ Altho’ So painful to me, I cannot ** but applaud his fidelity to Some more happy ** woman :—may fhe be deferving of him ! and tho’ I can never be happy, I may perhaps learn contentment.’^
The time had flipp’d away So agreeably, during our hero’s stay at Madrid, that he had already been there much longer than he at first intended ; and, at the earnest request of his Spanish friends, now wrote to Mr. Howard, to inform him of his intention of refiding there Some weeks longer; but that, as it would not be long enough for him to hear from England, he should not Subjoin his addrefs. Tho’ this was mere matter of opinion (as it was morally impoflible, that he could give any tolerably exa£i: guefs at the duration of his stay there) he did it on purpofe that he might hear nothing of Maria, whom he now flatter’d himfelf, he was in a fair way of forgetting.—
Vain man! when once afFefUon’s rooted in the breast, ’tis not the dilates of reafon, the immensity of distance, or the grave remarks of frigid prudence, which can remove it!—Had he not taken this unaccountable whim into his head, his felicity might in a few months have been completed, by having the still unmarried Maria in his arms :—but Mr. Howard being thus excluded
A MORAL NOVEL. 155
eluded from any poflibility of writing to him, happinefs and he Seemed as widely distant, as on the first day of his departure from England ; to which place I must beg to tranfport my reader, and leave Melvill with his friends at Madrid, endeavouring to forget a woman who still doated on him.
CHAP. XXIX.
^Tis fweet and commendable in your nature.
To give thefe mourning duties^ to your father t But you must know, your father lost a father. That father his, and the Survivor bound In filial obligation, for Some term To do oblequious Sorrow.
Hamlet..
Happy in so faithful a friend as Charlotte Howard, to Sympathize with her in all her affli6tions, after the first tumults of the grief, which jEmily’s death had occasioned, were, in Some degree fubfided, Maria began again to indulge thofe melancholy reflections that MelvilPg departure had occasion’d.—With the heart-felt, tortures of an unaffected Sorrow, she lamented his abfence she griev’d for him, ’tis true ;—but then that grief was allay’d, by fometiraes hearing of his welfare from Mr. Howardby the con-G 5	folatorj
154 A MORAL NOVEL.
folatory refle^ionsj that he must one day return; that when he found his error, his former love would revive, with an additional ardour, for having been thus Suppressed ; and, by the consideration that they might then be happy, in an union that was no longer oppofed by the harsh commands of an austere parent: on the contrary, Sir Thomas endeavoured all he could to make her forget his former ill ufage he was continue ally inventing new pleafures, to divert her from that melancholy, which the quick Succession of two Such unfortunate accidents had given her a turn to : nor was his endeavours wholly unfuc-cefsful; her former Serenity of mind and countenance began, in Some meafure, to return, to the unfpeakabie joy of her now over-fond parents she again began to be the Sprightly Maria Hartry dutiful to her parentsebliging-ly good natured to all who knew herbeloved by the whole country;—and, from the above considerations, poffessed a tolerable degree of happinefs, when another unforefeen accident happened to deprive her of it: which, although it is what every one must meet with. Some time or other, was nevertheless very iinexpefted at that period ; being no other than the death of Sir Thomas, after a few days illnefs.-
Maria felt this lofs the more Severely, as her father’s fondneSs for her Seemed every day to in-creafe ; having (as it were) had her restored to his arms, from the mouth of the all-devouring
grave;
A M O R A L N O V E L. 155
grave : we may therefore reafonably conclude, that, with a heart poffelSed of extreme fenSibility, her grief for the lofs of fo good a parent, would be almost immoderate ; but being a natural affliction, no one attempted to restrain it.
Lady Hartry was much too good a woman, not to be Sensibly concern’d for the lofs of a man, who had been united to her by the tender ties of wedlock ; neither could she be fuppofed to feel the fame degree of Sorrow for him, as if their lives had been one continued round of harmonious concord, which no one can imagine to be the cafe ; as her’s was rather a match of obedience to the inclinations of others, than from any choice of her own ; but
So Venus wills, whofe power controuls The fond affedtions of our fouls;
With fportive cruelty she binds Unequal forms, unequal minds.
F R A N c I s’s H o R A c j::
On the death of Sir I’homas, Mr. Howard and Charlotte remov’d to Oak-hall; that by their company and conversation, they might Support the drooping Spirits of the widow and her daughter.—On opening the will of the deceas’d, they found that he had left his whole estate to his only fon Charles, then Sir Charles Hartry, in cafe he should ever return to claim it ; out of which he was to pay the under-raention’d legacies
to
156 A MORAL NOVEL,
to his mother, lady Hartry, during her life, the fum of one thouland pounds annually; to his sister twenty ihouSand pounds on demand ; to Charlotte and Melvill, each one thoufand pounds; leaving it, as his last desire, that the latter, on his return, stiould marry Maria; and to Mr. Howard, whom he appointed his executor, for his trouble therein, two thoufand pounds; but,— in cafe his Son should not return, he bequeath’d his estate to his wife, on the fame conditions ; and after her death, to his daughter Maria; who now finding herfelf in poffefllon of an ample independency, determined to offer it to Melvill, on his return ; for which, having waited for Some months, with great patience, and no sign thereof appearing, she again began to relapfe into her former melancholy ; which Mr. Howard perceiving, propofed to lady Hartry, in order to diversify the Scene, a journey to Bath ; Saying, that himfelf and Charlotte would accompany them.
In hopes of re-establishing her daughter’s health, that was visibly declining, she readily agreed to this propofal ; and they, in a few days, accordingly fet out on their journey. Maria was pleafed at leaving a place, where every ob-je£l; Serv’d but to remind her of the many happy days she had formerly Spent there ; nor was her joy a little increas’d, by the heart-felt fatisfaflion of being accompanied by her dear Charlotte:—* however, not to be troublefomely minute, I shall
paSs
A MORAL NOVEL. 157
pafs over the particulars of their journey, and proceed to that time when they were fafely lodged on the parade at Bath.
As pleafure was their foie purfuit, their chief care was to Spend their time with the greatest Satisfa6fion to themfelves; and as this is by most people fuppofed to consist in being in a continued round of company ; they were the next day waited on by a number of people.
Who all with addrefs and civility came.
And Seem’d vastly proud of Subscribing their name.
New Bath Guide.
Bath was now in its greatest fplendor; that is to fay, was So very full, that a lodging could Scarcely be had for love or money:—they met with many families of their acquaintance, who Soon introduc’d them to a larger circle, and to all the publick places. A few nights after the arrival, they went to the rooms, when, as Is ufual on the appearance of any new faces, a buzzing whisper ran round the company ; fuch as,— Who are they ?■—'when did they come ?—where do they lodge r^—the youngefl in mourning is amazingly handfome ;—and many other remarks, equally curious and impertinent, which all people think custom has given them an undoubted right to make, on the appearance of strangers.—Maria ^indeed look’d uncommonly beautiful; the gloomi-
neSs
158 A M O R A L N O V E .D
nefs of her habit was well Suited to her counte-nanccj which had a pleaSing mark of Sorrow diffused over it, oceasioned by her late loSs afflidlion had touched her looks with Something that was starce earthly, flill flic was feminine.
CHAP. XXX.
Came there a certain lord, neat, trimly dreSs’d, Fresh as a bridegroom, and his chin new reap’d, Shav’d like a stubble land at harvest home ;
He was perfumed like a milliner ;
And ’twixt his singer and his thumb he held A pouncet box; which ever and anon He gave his noSe, and took’t away again.
The first part of King Henry IV.
CHARLOTTE being an unuSually Smart girl. Soon engag’d a partner for the evening ; and Maria had not been long Seated, before lord Dapperwit advancing in a minuet step, with a pert, though genteel air, begg’d the honour of her hand, which she as politely refufed ; adding, that she did not intend dancing that evening.
With any other man but lord Dapperwit, here the conversation would of courSe have dropped ;
but
A moral NOVEL. 159
but he with a polite effrontery replied, that he had ccwme to the rooms with the fame intention ; but on feeing So amiable a lady, could not deny himfelf the SatisfaQion of afking her hand ; but since she was not inclined to do him that favour, begg’d he might have the honour of sitting by her: she nodded assent, and my lord took his place accordingly.—Before I proceed, it may not be improper to give Some further account of this nobleman, who being possessed of a very large ef« tate, thought himfelf thereby qualified to do whatever he pleafed ; which pleafure his lordship once carried fo far, as very narrowly to eScape being run through the body, for pleasing to be infolently rude to a lady, whofe cauSe a gentleman in company chofe to efpoufe, and called his lordship to a pretty Severe account for, his behaviour ; nor was this the only Scrape he got into, by the invariable disposition of doing whatever he had a mind to, becaufe he had money ; but he looked upon them all as adlions worthy a buck, in whxh ideal charadler it was the height of his ambition to shine.
Being of courfe a pattern of pertnefs and affectation, this entirely obfeured his natural parts, which were, in themSelves, far from contemptible ; and, in proper hands, might have been made ufe of to the establishment of a commend-^ able chara6ler ; he likewife thought himfelf very witty, always endeavouring to appear So, by abusing every body he Saw, whether he knev/
them
t 6o A MORAL NOVEL, them or not, in what he call’d, a pleafant vefjx of humour ; which only ferv’d to render him m the eyes of all fensible people more thoroughly ridiculous: for it was, as Churchill fays.
Aiming at wit, tho* levell’d in the dark.’"
Hearing himfelf talk, right or wrong, was the height of his ambition ; he was, rn short, what is generally understood by a polite man of ** quality that is to fay, he was a mean sharper at Arthur’s,— a frantick buck at the Thatch’d Hcufe,-—a numScull politican at the Cocoa Tree; —and a coxcomb every where ;—and though no one was more exadliy constant in running the rapid and tedious circle of polite pleaSures ; yet, as h's love for gaming was by far his most precio-minaut passion, he contrived to allot the greatest part of his time to the indulgence of that passion ; and as Bath is perfectly calculated' to profecute fnch a Scheme, he generally attended there every feafon, to impofe on the ignorant, with fome of thofe tricks, which his companions in town, from being as wife as himfelf, could not be taken in i by : and indeed this was his businefs in the rooms at that time ; but Maria unluckily happening to strike his view, he determin’d to aft: her to. dance, which he did' in the urgent manner above related.
He was no fooner Seated, than he began to afk Several familiar questions j as,—how long she had' been at Bath ?—how she lik’d it ?—how long she
propofcd
A M O R A L N O V E L. i6i
propofed staying ?-"with many others, equally trifling and infignificant : to all which Maria anfwered with the greatest complacence and good nature.
The conversation had for Some time dropp’d, when she unhappily at once gave him an opportunity of refuming it, and difplaying his Satirical talents, by inadvertently ashing, if he knew who the gentleman was, that was then dancing a minuet ?
** O ! that madam (Said he) is, entre noust as errant a rafcal as ever liv’d ; I never heard his “ name; but am perfectly acquainted with his “ charafler, which is all I desire to know of him;
for he is a fellow whom no-body chufes to be “ Seen with.—He is worth money, which he ** gets in London by stockjobbing, and comes « down to Bath every year to Spend it, by Setting «< up for a beau but you fee madam, he has “ not the true natural air,—it is all studied,—all " aflPe^edhe moves as aukwardly, as if he ** never had a lac’d coat on before;—a perfe6fc « puppet upon wires like the print of grown gentlemen taught to dance,—ha I ha 1 ha!”
Do you fee that lady in the mazarine blue and silver Sack ?—she, madam, was no more than a milliner’s apprentice in Tavistock-street, « when Sir Henry Rattle took her into his good graces.”—Thus was this poppinjay’running
on,
A M O R A L N O V E L.
abusing people, without one word of truth, and many whom he had never before Seen, as an amufement for a young lady of fenfe, above Scandal ; thinking that, as with moss others of his acquaintance, he could thus chatter himfelf into her good graces.
With what justice may the rigid moralists of the age exclaim against So stocking a prostitution, both of time and words! and yet is it not amazing, that though every-body Seems convinced of the truth thereof, they stould all be encouragers of ihefe modern Foppingtons, by regarding their folly as a sit objeft for ridicule and laughter, rather than contempt or negle^.
CHAP. XXXI.
Blame not the belles, since modern times can stew That ape of female foppery, call’d a beau.
The Connoisseur,
Lord Dapperwit having fora long while thus fat wearying his hearer, with all the insignificance of folly, tho’ at the fame time with the most Superficial infolence of pride, at length grew fo troublefome, that poor Maria V.	could
A M O R A L N O V E L. 163
could no longer bear him with any degree of pati-. ence; fhe therefore (thinking to get rid of himi hasten’d to another part of the room ; but our modern Lotharia, was not to be fo easily shaken off: for, immediately following, he again Seated him-Self clofe at her elbow; in short, she Several times shifted her flalion, and he as often purfued her, all the while making attempts to find out where she lodg’d, which she had pre-determin’d not to kt him know, justly imagining, that if she did, he would be a continual torment to her.
His lordship not at all difcourag’d by the evasive anfwers he receiv’d, still kept with her, continuing to prattle an infinity of fmall talk, or rather nothing; in return to which, she Scarcely Spoke ten words the whole evening ; fo that though they were together, he could hardly be faid to enjoy her company.
Quite harrafs’d with this coxcomb’s importunity, as her only refource, (tho* it was then early) she determin’d to leave the rooms ; which resolution she communicated to her mother, who was engag’d at cards; at the Same time informirrg her of the reafon, as she likewife did her friend Charlotte; when my lord, from over-hearing a few words, guesting what was her design, insisted on attending her home ; and she as strongly insisted that he should not; however, he was much too well-bred a man, to take any denial, and all her remonstrances would have signified but little,
had
164 A M O R A L N O V E L.
had not an intimate of my lord’s, fuch ano.her as himSelf, luck'.ly at that instant, laid hold of his button, to tell him Some important gambling event; during which lucky interm, Maria made her efcape, inwardly pleas’d (as foe then thought) thus to have got rid of fo troublefome a puppy ; hut alas I it prov’d far otherwite ; for when my lord perceiv’d that stie was gone, v/ithout his having been able to find out her place of refi-dence, he began abuSing the perfon who had thus stopped him.
« I wisti Mellifont, (Said he) with all my heart, ** you had been at the devil, ere I’d met you ; “ for I have been in company the whole evening ** with the Sweetest girl upon earth, and now
your d-----’d unlucky face has prevented me
from finding out where she lodgesshe has “ given me the flip as I live.—-Egad she is a deli-** cate morSel, and I would not lofe her for five hundred pounds.”
** Oh, is that all, (anfwer’d his friend) don’t let fuch a trifle give you any uneafineSs, for, « in the common courfe of things, no girl in “ Bath can be conceal’d from me many days but here, I can at once put you into a Sure “ method of discovering her:—she feems inti-“ mate with the lady (meaning Charlotte) that is dancing with Sir Thomas Atwell, who will most afluredly wait on his partner to morrow ; it will therefore be the easiest thing in life, by
only
A M O R A L N O V E L. 165
or-.y Speaking to him, to gain fome further particulars concerning her,’*
“ You have nick’d it, my dear boy, (replies his lordShip) and then, my buck,”—
And then, what! (interrupted Mellifont) why, furely you can have no design to meta-morphofe yourfelf, from the gay lord Dapper-“ wit, into a Sober, Sedate hufband.”—
Hufband ! (re-ecchoed his lordship) par-donnez moy^—no Such intentions, on the word of a gentleman,—the farthest thing in the world from my thoughts ;—ch the bourgeois/ “ Matrimony indeed!—no, no, I have other “ fchemes in agitation :—I fuppoSe the girl has “ little or no fortune, and I think, she can’t have many objedlions to being houfe-keeper ‘‘ to the right honourable lord Dapperwit,—you “ understand me, — ha, Mellifont, — but as I « shall most likely want your astistance, call on “ me to-morrow evening, when we will talk further on the fubjedt:—don’t fail me:—till “ then, adieu, — and in the interim, — vive “ ramour—and thus the two friends parted.
The reader must by this time perceive what were this nobleman’s intentions, with regard to Maria ; he made no doubt, but that it would be an eafy matter for a perfon of his figure and confequence, to do whatever he pleas’d with a
silly
i66 A MORAL NOVEL.
Silly credulous girl, for with him every girl was Such ; he therefore made it his bufinefs to wait on Charlotte’s partner the next day, and from him learnt all that he desired to know concerning Maria; and tho* he was not a little pleafed at this discovery, yet at the fame time he began to consider, that as she was a girl of fortune and knowledge, he should meet with more difficulty in'the execution of his Scheme, than he was at first aware of; and as he faw no probability of ever bringing it to perfeftion, was on the point of refolving to give up all farther thoughts thereof, when Mellifont, according to appointment, entered the room; but as this gentleman •will, in all likelihood, cut no fmall figure in this part of the history, I must beg leave to make my readers better acquainted with him, that when they know his charafter, they may not be Surpriz’d at any of his deeds ; for ’tis the afifions which proclaim the man;
k. . k. -	.	CHAP.
A MORAL NOVEL. idy CHAP. XXXII.
To be obliged to minister to another man’s vices for a wretched fubfistence, is to degrade human nature below the brutes.
,	School for Rakes.
Mr. Mellifont was the youngest fon of a gentleman in Shropshire, and therefore of courfe, could not be Suppos’d to have fortune Sufficient to enable him to live independent of the world ; this being the cafe, he was placed out in the capacity of a clerk, in one of the most capital mercantile houSes in London, the regularity of which life, did not Suit the gaiety of the young gentleman’s difposition ; who finding the air of the city too heavy for his constitution, made frequent excursions to the other end of the town, and was fometimes abfent from his buSmefs a week together, for which, on his return, he was alvrays Severely reprimanded by his master; but thefe reprimands, instead of producing any amendment. Served only to heighten his distike to the counling-houfe ; he was therefore rarely Seen in it, but commencing at once the petit maitre and fine gentleman, (charafilers, which too many young men are ambitious of attaining) took lodgings near Covent Garden, and wasted his time in a continual round of what is commonly called pleafure, or
cd caw
-PFr
, /r. /A A // Ly}. . /.	, i/^An /y AfyjAay!
i6S A M O R A L N O V E L.
in other words, of noify debauchery, and prO' fligatc excels.
As it was very well known> that on the death of his father, he must come into four thoufand pounds, which had been fettled on him by his grandmother, he found people enough ready to advance him money, at an exorbitant interest.
In this manner did he live, contracting debts on the strength of his future fortune, never once considering, that he was fpending it, without the enjoyment, or even poffestion thereof:— burled in vices and obfcenity, the recolleCtion of which, in his cooler moments, silled him with inexprestible anguish ; (for every man must Sometimes think) ruining his constitution, and vitiating his principles, to fay nothing of his continual fears lest he should be arrested by Some of thofe people whom he had disappointed, in promising them payment; but as he never gave himfelf time or trouble to think Serlousiy,’ for any continuance, thefe things could make but a momentary impreflion on him.
He continued in this courfe of life for near four years, during which time, he contracted a numerous acquaintance among people of the fame stamp with himfelf, on all of whom he pafs’d himfelf for a man of fortune; and, under this character, gained Something from most of them, that is to fay, he learnt connivance from
pick-
A M O R A L N O V E L. 169
pick-pockets and Sharpers, cringing from pimps, audacity from bullies, and the noble art of contrivance from prostitutes: under which five heads, we Shall conclude the whole circle of his acquaintance: he was now in continual expectation of his father’s death, which at length happened; not a little hasten’d by his favourite Son’s behaviour, to whom he had frequently represented the unavoidable conSequences of Such proceedings, but in vain; pleafure was the ob-je£b of his purfuit, nor did he care at how dear a rate he purchafed it, though it were by the death of an indulgent parent.
This happy time once arrived, he came immediately into the poSTestion of his long expeSed fortune, and notwithstanding he had been preacquainted with the exafit Sum, was amazed to find himfelf much poorer than he was aware of; for, after having paid the money he had borrowed, with the interest thereon, his taylor, hofier, &^c. out of the four thoufand he had received, he found himfelf in actual poffeSfion of but five hundred, a good stock of cloaths, and Some little dear-bought experience.
He now, for once in his life, began to think feriousty ; he confidered, that at the rate he then went on, he should Soon fee the end of his five hundred pounds; and, as neceSTity is the mother of invention, began to look out for Some method whereby he might increaSe it; when VoL. II.	H	only
170 A M O R A L N O V E L. only two presenting themfelves to his fancy, (namely) either to buy a share in Some shop with the money he then had, or elfe to continue in the state of a fine gentleman, and, by perfuading Some rich widow or heirefs, for once in their lives, to step into a hired carriage, thereby be enabled to ride in his own, for the rest of bis ; he was not loftg in determining upon the latter, which was far the most agreeable to his inclinations ; and from his great Skill in the art of iinpofition, had fo far brought his fcheme to bear, as to be on the point of running away with a young heirefs, on whom he had palmed him-felf for a nobleman of distindlion, when the prying officioufnefs of his intended lady’s chamber-maid, difcovered that his title was borrowed, and that all his estate, and of courfe his gentility, con fisted in a laced coat, and a large stock of impudence, the latter of which qualifications he stood greatly in need of, to extricate himfelf from the affair.
Thus, by an unexpedled blast, w^ere all the profpedls of his future felicity destroyed, just when he had brought them to the Summit of perfection ; and as he nov/ found it would be impofubie to put his fcheme into execution in London,., he hurried down to Bath on the fame errand, where he became perfonally acquainted with lord Dapperwit, who was before by no means ignorant of his name or profeffon, tho* for reafons best known to himfelf, he had choSe
to
A M O R A L N O V E L. 171
to conceal them from Maria; for indeed this was the gentleman whom he had reprefented to her as a stock-jobber.
One would imagine, that this nobleman must receive a peculiar pleafure in thus conSidering people in charadlers which they had no right to, as it was his constant pradtice, and, which (as he valued himfelf very much upon it) he Sometimes facetiousty, and not improperly termed, a mafquerade in the mind’s eye.
But to return from this digreffion: lord Dap-perwit thinking Mellifont would be a ufeful man in the eirecution of any Scheme of villany, made him an offer of living with him as a companion, and occasional upper Servant, or in other words, as a Servile parasite, on whom he might tauntingly ejcercife all his cruelty, without any danger of refentment, which was joyfully accepted; and furely, this very circumstance of agreeing to live with any nobleman on Such terms, must, to every delicate mind, Sufficiently shew the man in his true colours; for what perfon who has the least degree of principle or honest pride, would, while he is enabled to provide for himfelf, stoop and conform to all the humours of a debauched nobleman for a Subsistence, which (notwithstanding he may live in all the fplendour and expence of pomp) is still shamefully fcandalous and mean ;—must not any man feel a greater degree of innate Satisfadfion, H 3	when
^-^2 A MORAL NOVEL.
when Sitting down to a plain, homely meal, which he knows to be the the fruits of honest industry, than to be pampered with delicacies for Some well-executed a6l of wickednefs, by a
rafcal of a lord ?-but nature has fafhioned
strange creatures in her time, and one of thefc was MellifoKt.
CHAP, xxxni.
One woe doth tread upon another’s heels,
■So fast they folIowL
'	Hamlet.
The gentleman, whofe history I related in my last chapter, entered the room, just as my lord had determined to give over all farther purstiit of Maria ; crying with his ufual impudent vivacity;—« Well, my lord, may I give you joy r—have you found out who this fair incognita is ?—this terrestrial angel ?”
Yes, (replied his master, with a Sullen difcontentsdnefs)—I have,—her name is Har-try,—fhe has twenty thoufand pounds at her “ own diSpofal, and as it will therefore be im-possible to put my Schemes into execution, I have refolved to think no more, of her.”-
Impossible!
A MORAL NOVEL. 173
Impoffible ! there’s nothing impoITible to your lorcllhip’s parts, titles, and fortune, (re-joined Mellifont)—I thought you had been a ** man of more intrepidity, than to give up a ** girl, becaufe she has money; that will indeed prevent your making the intended propofals, but it can be no impediment to the accom-** plishmcnt of your wishes.”——
How, how, (demanded my lord eagerly.”)
Why, (replyed he) it will be an eafy mat-ter to watch her Some night from the rooms, ** put her into a wrong chair,—have a carriage waiting,—force her into it,—whirl her down ** to your houfe in Wales, where it will be impossible for her friends to find her ; and then you know, force and fear may induce her to ' ** what her inclinations perhaps would resist.”
Bravo (replied ray lord) E’gad that will do; « ’twill make a noife in the world, and give a “ double relish to delight; thou shall be my « oracle and direct all; I must now drefs, and hope before raorning, to nick Sir John Soft-“ head out of a thoufand : call on me to-morrow « forenoon, and we’ll fettle the glorious plan of ** amorous operations.”
Thus were thefe two villains planning Schemes for the ruin of an innocent girl, while siie was unknowingly giving them an opportunity of K3	ptting
174 A M O R A L N O V E L.
putting them in execution, by going to the rooms a few evenings after the above conference.
On her entrance, the first obje6l that struck her eyes was Melllfont ; who having already prepar’d every thing necessary, hasten’d to inform my lord of this lucky circumstance; who thought proper not to make his appearance, till it was time to execute their projed'.
Unhappily for poor Maria, the night feemed to favour their defign, being very rainy, accompanied with a great deal of thunder and lightening.
On her wanting to go home, to her great fur-prize, her fervant was not to be found: and (he, of courfe, prevented from getting to her chair; while fhe was standing in this situation, my lord (who had taken care to have her fervant made drunk at a neighbouring ale-houfe) appeared; and finding what was the caufe of her dilemma, made her an offer of his Sedan, w’hich was just by, and which, after Some little apology, fhe was too easily prevail’d on to accept.
While they were standing together in the courfe of converfation, he had afk’d her, whether she was afraid of the lightening ? of which having expressed great apprehensions, when he put her into the chair, he made that a plea for
advising
A MORAL NOVEL. 175
advifing her to draw the curtains clofe ; which She accordingly did. My lord, elate with joy at his fuccefs, now walked as fast as he could before the chairmen, to stiew them the way ; and whom the reward of a couple of guineas, made proceed at an unufual rate.
They had already got upon the turnpike road, ^ when our heroine, thinking they were very long in carrying her home, opened the curtains, to fee where She was;—but, good heavens! v.'hat was her astonishment, when she found herfelf in an open country, near a mile from. Bath, and lord'Dapperwit, whom, by the moon being just rifen she could easily distinguish walking before,
at a fmall distance.
\
When she had fo far recovered, from the first violent effefls of her amazement, as to be able to fpeak, she begg’d the chairmen to stop, and inform her, whither they were carrying her ; to which she received no other anfwer, than being desired to sit still—but, added one of them, “ I ** believe your journey with us is almost at an “ end ; as I think I fee the carriage before
us.”"— — —-
She then too plainly Saw into my lord’s vil-lany ; and, with tears in her eyes, intreated the chairmen to return:—in vain did she endeavour to perfuade them ;—in vain did she pro-inife any reward j—it was all to no purpofe
had
176 A MORAL NOVEL.
.had it been their inclination, it was jmpoffible ; her feducer was just before, and had his eyes constantly fixed upon the chair.
As her only refource therefore, she was obliged to call in patience to her astistance, and hope' the best.
The chair having now stopped, my lord handed her into a post coach ; at the fame time, telling her, that it would be to no purpofe to make any resistance; which she was too well convinc’d of before ; and considering that, as it was impoffible for her to efcape, she should fare the better, if she gave them no occasion to ufe her roughly, quietly Seated herfelf in the carriage next to her betrayer :—Mellifont, who had been waiting for them, having previoufly plac’d himfelf on the other side, and in this situation, they drove away at an immenfe pace, a profound silence for fome time being obferved by all the parties.
CHAP.
A MORAL NOVEL. 177
CHAP. XXXIV.
Can the poor Seaman’s humble prayer^
When high their heads the billows bear,.
To Silence hush the flood ?
Caft the lamb’s feeble cries restrain.
The midnight horrors of the plain.
When Hons roar for food ?
II..
So weak is reafon to controul.
Or footh the tempest of the foul,,
When paflions tear the breast ;
Tho’ earnest th’ expiring groan,
Tho’ moting as the plaintive moan Of innocence distrest.
H o Y L A N d’s Poems.
During she first ten miles of their journey, poor Maria was dilfolved in tears, and her fwell’d heart beat, as if it would have burst its tender prifon in which state of melancholy infenSibility, like an ox going to she flaughier, or a lamb dumb before its shearers, did she remain for fome time ; till recolledling that her tears would do but little towards her enlargement, she at last took courage to fpeak ta her Seducer.".
Jh’
1.78 A M O R A L N O V E L.
In the most pathetic manner, she intreated him not to make her miferable for life, by thus dividing her from all that she valued upon earth ; -—she made uSe of every argument in her power to perfuade him to restore her to her friends; but alas ! she found they were in vain.—Had she been endowed with the perfuasion of a Cicero, or a Demosthenes, they would all have been in-effediual ; he was therefore Surely not to be worked upon, by what he deemed, the Supplications of an unfchooled girl; he was pleafed to the highest degree, at the fucceSs of his Scheme; and only anSwered to all that she Said with Sullen-nefs, or by a cutting, miSplaced raillery.
They had travelled in this manner, about three hours, when they stopped to change horfes; which, as Maria knew they must do, she had flattered herfelf with the expedtation of then finding Some means for her efcape ; but cur determin’d Lothario (thanks to the Schools of vice, in which he had been educated) was not fo bad a master of his trade ;-*-he had taken care to have proper relays of hOrfes on the road, and therefore, without being delay’d any material time, they travelled in this expeditious manner, till about ten o’clock, when he afked Maria, if she choSe any breakfast? which being refufed, he gave fresh orders to his Servants to proceed ; faying, that he should , not stop till the afternoon. And as he now thought himSelf too far from Bath to fear being overtaken, he endeavoured to enter
A MORAL NOVEL. 179
ter into conversation with her, by afking a long string of impertinent questions ; to all which She anfwered with the utmost civility and complaisance, thinking it best So to do ; but her attention was too much engaged, by the melancholy proSpeft before her, to Suffer any one tO' Share it but Melvill: of him indeed she Secretly thought, and for his Sake determined to part with her life. Sooner than, what was to her, and should be to every woman, dearer than life,-— her honour.-
About four o’clock they alighted to dinner, at a lone farm-houfe, from whence there was no poffibility of her efcaping, nor any perfon to compastionate her situation ; So that the hopes with which she had hitherto buoy’d herSelf up,, were now entirely destroyed and, not to trouble my readers with all the particulars of a diSa-greeable journey, I shall content mySelf with Saying, that after having proceeded at a most furious rate, for a night and a day, she found herSelf in an old ruinated mansion, without any other houfe in sight; in what part of the world she could not tell ; but,, from the immenSe mountains behind,, she judged it to be (as it really was) on the borders of Wales; on her arrival at this mansion of vice, as it was then late, she was conduced into a bed-chamber, by a perfon who, from her appearance, she took to be the houSe-keeper.
Having;
i8i A MORAL NOVEL.
Having no inclination to fleep (for indeed her misfortunes touched her too nearly, to Suffer her to take any rest) She threw herfelf upon the bed, without undressing ; and, having Spent fome hours in fruitleSs endeavours, to gain a short reS-pite from her mifery, by ssumber, the following lamentations broke from her lips;
Wretch that I am I where will my calaml-ties end ? am I for ever doom’d to be the Sport ** of fortune ?—alas! why was I not permitted to ** die whilst an infant, and by that means to have ** eScaped the many miferies I was born to fuffer ?
—but let me not arraign the All-wife, for “ through his goodnefs, I may still be happy;
although the path, to my weak fight, appears “ inextricable.”....
Oh Melvill I were you but acquainted << with my Sufferings, and knew how much I stand in need of your assistance,—I’m Sure you “ would joyfully bestow it;—but why do I still ** think of him ?—or, to what purpofe do I own ** my love ?—he quits his native land to fly from me -but my poor mother!—what tortures now ‘‘must she endure ?—alas! how must her dear « heart bleed for her afflidled daughter ?”—In this mannerdid she Spend greatest part of the night, while he that was the caufe of her misfortunes stept as Serenely, as if, blest with native innocence : but, as mifery cannot endure for ever, the tender nature of Maria, being almost worn
out,
A MORAL NOVEL. i8i
out, at length gave way to peaceful flumber, that balm of hurt minds, chief nourilher in life’s great feast ; and she had, for fome time, lost her fen-fes in a delusive dream, when the entrance of a Servant (who came to bring her fresh cloaihs) awakened her, to recoiled she poignant situation she was in.
As Soon as she w.as dressed, she was eonda6b-ed to my lord ; who after breakfast, began to take fome unjustifiable liberties with her ; upon which she again implored him on her knees, not to detain her longer against her will ; and attempted to reprefent to him, the sinfulnefs of his inhofpitable treatment ; but as (to uSe his owm expreshon) he was not then in a humour for moralizing : he left her, faying, th^t he would give her two days for consideration thereon ; but that if, at the end of that time, she still obstinately refufed to gratify his wishes,—force should prevail.
This was a terrible declaration for she afflid-ed Maria; who fixing her lovely eyes stedfastly on the ground. Seem’d for fome time stupified by thought ; at length rising triumphantly, she exclaimed,—“ Yes,—it shall be So,-—I am deter-“ mined,— firmly fixed,---that if before the end “ of two days, no apparent means for my efcape “ are found,—-I will at once put an end to all my heart-rending miferies,—by—by--what ?--oh “ distradlng thought !—by fuicide.”—Then
again
IKZ A MORAL NOVEL, again dropping on her knees, and clafping her hands, fhe cried, I know the heinouSnefs of the ** crime, I have refolved to commit,— I fee it in " its full force,—terrible to think of, and shock-** ing to human nature -but still I hope for “ mercy;—I hope that the abfolute necefllty for the afifion,—-my preferlng death, and that by ** my own hand too, to the lofs of my honour, will, in Some meafure,,palliate and atone for the attrocioufnefs of the deed ; and that the all-wife Being will in another world, pardon the wicked-nefs of a crime, which mifery and defpair has drove me to in this:—a crime, which even un-der thefe cirumstances, makes my nature shud-“ der, and almost abhor her own refolves.”'
CHAP. XXXV.
There is Some foul of goodnefs in things evil, Would men obfervingly distill it out.
Henry V.
WHEN our heroine had made the dreadful refolution, with which 1 concluded [ my last chapter, she Seemed much more calm and [eafy than before ; and in order to amufe herfelf, took up her favourite author Shakefpeare, which lay on a table by her ; when, on opening it, the ■ first words on which she cast her eyes were.
Against
A MORAL NOVEL. 183
——Against felf-staughter There is a prohibition So divine.
That cravens my weak hand.
C YMB EIN
On reading this Sentence, it was with the greatest difficulty, that she could Support herfelf, after the impious determination she had just made,, she could not look upon it as intirely accidental, but, on the contrary, rather consider’d it as a rebuke from above, for the sinfulnefs of her intensions and as a warning against executing them ; in vain did she attempt to argue with herfelff that it was merely fortuitous that she pitch’d upon that particular Sentiment,—she could not be perfuaded of it, and if that was the cafe, she determined to prosit thereby in short, the sirmnefs and intrepidity she had just boasted,-— were vanish’d—the light in which she had before consider’d the deed, to make it justifiable, was chang’d thrice happy would it be, were every one thus to reap advantage from an accident, I do not mean in the like cafe, as it is to be hop’d, that no one (however unhappy) will ever be thus induc’d to forget the Supreme duty which he owes to his Creator and himfelf ; neither would I be understood to signify, that every one is blest with fo timely and forcible a warning ; all that I would wish to inculcate by thefe reflexions, is, to advife the children of adversity, when they have made a refolution, however trifling or
mo-
i84 a moral novel..
momentous, previous to the execution thereof; ferioufly to alk their own confciences, whether, what they are about to do is justifiable, '^either in the fight of God or man ? and I am thoroughly convinced, they will need no other monitor to adviSe them what courfe to take.
But to return to poor Maria, the above affair made So deep an imprestion on her mind, that Ihe could no more recover her tranquillity, but almost distracted by the equal counterpoise of doubt and fear, passed the day in the most painful uncertainty which way to a£t; and after a restlefs night, rofc in the morning, regarding ! herfelf as a viCtim, destin’d for a Sacrifice, to the bafe purpofes of infamous nobility ; and although fhe had now laid afide all thoughts of revenging herfelf, still Ihe refolved to part with life, in preference to her honour, well knowing,, that the former is a debt which all must pay, and that nothing ever can justify a deprivation of the latter; however, before Ihe attempted to repel force by force, she determined again to ufe all her rheiorick, to perfuade, him to reliquish his defigns; and as she knew he had no love for her, exclusive of grofs gratifications, which dif-f grace the charafter of a man; she flattered herfelf, that when he should fee the crime in its true light, that fome Spark of that goodnefs nature has planted in every breast,- would check the violence of his passions:—but we are all too apt to judge of others by ourSelves,—-this was her
OWIli
A MORAL NOVEL. 185
Ciwn way of thinking, and therefore fhe vainly thought, it must be his like wife.—
Happy indeed, would it have been for her, had her opinion been founded on just grounds, as he would then never have violated the laws of humanity, by thus bafely violating her inclinations and peace of mind; however, luckily she had no occafion to make ufe of her elocution, had it depended on that only, it would indeed have gone hard with her ; but while she w-as fitting at breakfast, Mellifont (whom she had not before Seen stnce her arrival) entered the room, and having enquired after her health, &TC. told her the occasion of his visit, as follows.
** I have (Said he) Madam, much against my inclinations, been concerned in bringing you “ here, but it was not in my povTr to avoid it I am a dependant on lord Dapperwit, and must ‘‘obey his commands;—he knew it,—he knew that I dared not aQ: contrary to his will, .and and therefore ungenerousty ufed his power, ** by making me a party in this affair; from “ the beginning of which, I sincerely pitied you, “ though I dared not openly exprefs it, but am now come to convince you thereof ; my lord Is gone out, and will not return till the even-ing, if you pleafe. I’ll conduQ: you to your friends ;—but, as by So doing, I must inevi-
tably
(
i86 A MORAL NOVEL.
tably lofe my Subsistence; I fhall expert a handSome gratuity for running thh rifque.”
As our heroine was not in a condition to hesitate, siie readily promiSed him a thouSand pounds,, as Soon as he Ihould deliver her to Mr. Howard, and thanked her preferver in the most exprestive terms, for his goodnefs ; after which,, they Set out together on foot, and having walk’d about two miles, arrived at an inn, from whence they took a post-chaiSe, and proceeded with all Speed towards Bath.
CHAP, xxxvr
Adversity with poignant dart.
By wounding, purifies the heart.
Expels each baleful weed ;
She prunes each wild luxuriant shoot.
Her fcion bears the noble fruit
Of virtue’s heav’nly feed.
The Exemplary Mother.
WHEN Maria had got fo far from the houfe of her betrayer, as no longer to ( be under any apprehensions of a purSuit, she again took an opportunity of thanking her deliverer, in the most grateful terms; though he was by no means deferving thereof, as it was not
honour.
A MORAL NOVEL. 187
honour, but avarice, which actuated him in this affair ; and, to Say the truth, he was in it play-■ ing the double villain, having just before, received a large Sum from lord Dapperwit, for his assistance in bringing away Maria ; and was now injuring that nobleman, by aiding and being privy to her efcape ; indeed he made no, fcruple of the latter, as it was performing a good adfion ; had it not, it would have been the fame ; for friendship, gratitude, and every other virtue, would have given way to that demon,—felf-interest.
When within about fifty miles of Bath, Maria had the happinefs of meeting Mr. Howard, who was then going in fearch of her. Great was the joy on both Sides, at this unexpected rencounter after the expression of which, our heroine took an opportunity of informing Mr. Howard of all that had happened to her, ssnce their Separation ; as likewise of her promife to Mellifont; to whom,, after having made proper acknowledgments for his behaviour, he gave a draught on his banker, payable at fight, for the agreed on fum, with a
cordial invitation into — — shire ; and having
dined together, they then parted, Mellifont for London, to receive his thoufand pounds, and Mr. Howard, with his charge for Bath: on their road to which place, he gave the following anfwer to her questions, concerning the reafon why they had So long delayed fending in quest of her.
In-
i§8 A M O R A L N O V E H
Indeed, my dear (Said he), you totally mistake ** the affair, as I can assure you, that we pro-ceeded with all possible expedition, in our en-deavours to recover you ; when, after waiting “ a tedious length of time,, we found you did not return from the rooms-;, you may eaSily « imagine the consternation we were in, and? « with what painful anxiety we Spent the rest of the night -in the morning I made stri<st in-“ quiry after you all over the town, but to no^ « purpoSe ; nor could we tell what to think of “ So extraordinary an affair ;'--we had no fuSpi-cion of lord Dapperwit, nor indeed of any one of elSe and should have been totally at a lofs what courSe to have taken, had it not been for “ an anonymous letter, I that day received in-“ forming me, you were carried to London^ “ This, as I have fince discovered, was Sent by “ my lord’s own orders, to put us- into a wrong track; however, in conSequence thereof, I immediately Set out for town, making inquiries “ after you at every inn on the road, tho% as you “ may imagine to no purpoSe. I now began to “ fufpeft the trick which had been played me;. “ when, remembering that lord Dapperwit was “ miffed from Bath, at the fame-time with your-“ Self, without any one being acquainted with his design ; and likewife recollecting, that he “ had a houfe in Caermarthenshire, I thought It “ most likely that, were he your feducer, he had carried you thither, and therefore refolved
M- upon
A M O R A L N O V E L. 189
upon paying him a viSit ; on my road to which " place I was, when my joyful meeting with you, happily prevented me from purfuing my jour-“ ney: and I hope we shall foon distribute hap-pinefs to a miferable family by our arrival at “ Bath.”
Maria then made tender inquiries after her mother and Charlotte, whom he informed her were well when he left them ; but that he was under great apprehensions, lest the grief which lady Hartry must inevitably feel, for not hearing of her daughter, vrould be too much for her constitution, which was already not a little impaired, by the repeated shocks she had lately undergOine ; nor were his fufpicions groundlefs; as on their arrival they found her ill in bed, and Charlotte in a situation almost Similar.
To defcribe the meeting between thefe friends, requires the efforts of an abler pen than mine; I shall therefore, by dropping a curtain over So pathetic a fcene, leave every one to figure to themfelves, what I cannot find terms to give them an adequate idea of, and content myfelf with observing, that there was never a stronger proof of the verity of the old remark, That we find more joy in the company of one that is regained^ “ than twenty who have never been lofi than in this instance.	/
As lady Hartry’s peace of mind was now restored, she daily grew better, and, in a short
time,
590 A MORAL NOVEL.
time, had no other remains of her diforder left, than an unufuallanguor of Spirits; when judging it most expedient to leave Bath as foon as poflible, they determined to fpend the enfuing winter in London, lat which place they arrived without any material accident, and were foon comfortably fettled in a ready-furnished houfe in Pall-Mall, where, as neither of the young ladies had ever been before, they found fufficient employment for all their leifure hours.
Having thus brought them to So Safe a place, I shall now quit them, and once more beg my reader’s company, to viSit an old acquaintance at Madrid ; though before I take my entire leave of London, I cannot forbear communicating to him a piece of news, at which, I don’t doubt, he will be full as much furprized, as were the newly arrived family ; who, at their first interview with Sir Henry Summers, had the mortification of hearing from him, that Mr. Martin, who for the first three months after poor Emily’s death, Seemed inconfolable for her lofs, and to have vowed a state of perpetual celibacy ; was on the point of marriage with a young lady of imrrrenfc fortune.—
Since fuch is the unaccountable caprice of an inconstancy of human nature ; who will place any confidence in the refolves of man ? which too often, like charafilers graven upon fand, are liable to be effaced by every adventitious blast.
CHAP.
A M O R A L N O V E L. 191
CHAP. XXXVIl.
......—She never told her love
But let concealment, like a worm i’th bud.
Feed on her damafk cheek.: She pin’d in thought. And fat like patience, on a monument, Smiling at grief,
Shakespeare,
WHILE Maria was involved in thofe distressful circumstances, Melville remained (if not happy, at least tranquil) with his friends at Madrid, whofe company he found So agreeable, that he Seemed to have renounc’d all inclinations for returning to England ; and altho* he was Gonfcious, that his prefence there, would in a few months be necessary, on account of his coming of age ; still it is very uncertain, when he would have prevailed upon himfelf to make the voyage, had it not been for the death of poor Juliana ; who, however her outward behaviour, might‘indicate a total annihilation of her unhappy passion, still inwardly retain’d the fame ardent affedtion for our hero as ever, which notwithstanding their Separation, instead of abating, Seem’d every day to increafe ; but having once refufed her hand, stie had too much commendable pride, to endeavour to gain by Solicitation, the affedtion of a man, who could not love her from inclination, and though she was confeious of the impropriety of her conduS, had not re-folution to abandon him from her mind, but inwardly
A MO R A L NOVEL, wardly lamenting her unhappy fate, flie pin’d in thought; and in the blooming vigour of her life, became a martyr to a misplac’d paflion.—
Death alone, could give a refpite to thofc tortures, from which, during her woe-fraught Sife, she knew no eafe.——
To you, ye virgins, who by nature are endowed with an uncommon share of lendernefs and fenfibility, this story is addressed ; whole minds, like the fair Surface of an unfunned show, are fufceptible of every impression, which the rude foot-steps of the passing traveller, may chance to make :—In every age, ——in every clime,——all Sages have agreed, that —examples strike, when precepts fail; — in lovely Juliana’s lot, behold, the fad effe6ls of difappointed love; from her example, learn never to fix your heart upon a stranger, until you know whether he is deferving of, or has it in his power to receive the gift: — fuffer not your eyes to gaze on his admir’d perfeftions, lest when you exprefs your approbation, you should imbibe the poifon of a hopelefs love, and thereby finish your existence ; — leave not your parents, — lister, — brother, — friend, to mourn for their departed child, or friend: — let this poor maiden’s courfe, ferve as a buoy for you, to shun the rock which she has Split on; So shall the living by the dead be taught: — but a truce with grave reflexions; — she is gone: — peace attend her Spirit, — for impotently vain is every lamentation for her
loSs;
A MORAL NOVEL. 193 lofs; or in short, any lofs of a temporal nature.
The whole family imagined Juliana’s diforder to be a consumption, but with her latest breath, and never till then did she confeSs the miferable caufe of her indifpoSition ;—a broken heart.
Nobody that was acquainted with her perfections, when living, could help pitying her fate, when dead; as did Melvill, perhaps more sincerely than any other; but finding that although involuntarily, he nevertheless was considered as the foie author of her death ; and that instead of a hearty welcome from Don Pe-lajo, he met with nothing but a cold reception, and far-fetch’d compliments; he determin’d once more to visit his native foil, though he dreaded to fee a place, where he had once experienced fuch uninterrupted felicity, and much more tc fee her, who was the caufe of all his uneafinefs; but for the above reafonj finding it absolutely necessary, he made no long hesitation on the fubjeCt, and taking a tender farewel of Don Carlos, (who still retain’d his former friendship for him) in a few days Set out for Paris, which place, he had promifed Some acquaintances there to make in his return home ; and thinking a furpriz® would be far the most agreeable : he deferr’d writing to Mr. Howard, till he could with certainty, inform him of the day of his arrival.
VOL. II.	I	CHAP.
194 A MORAL NOVEL,
\
CHAP, xxxvm.
If this be true, the gods do mean to strike me dead with mortal joy.
Cyme zline.
ON cmr hero’s arrival at Paris, he was easily prevail’d upon (by Some Englifh gentlemen, who were there on a party of pleafure) to make that the place of his residence for a month, about half of which time had elapfed ; when having occasion for Some stockings, he went to a hosiers in the rue de St. Germain ; on his entrance of the Shop, he obferved behind the counter, a young man in half mourning, of whofe face he had Some confus’d remembrance, but no particular idea ; his addrefs was eaSy and genteel, without pertnefs, and in his whole behaviour, there was a politenefs Superior to what we generally meet with, in people in that rank of life ; at which Melvill was not a little Surpriz’d, e'pecially as by his conversation he found, that he was not a native of France, and that therefore his gentility was far different from that officious politeff'e, So naturally the inherent qualification of every Frenchman ; and it still running in his head strongly, that he had Seen him Somewhere before; he could not forbear alking him the question.
it Very likely, (replied the young man) as I perceive we are countrymen.”—
Meh
A MORAL NOVEL. i95
Melvin finding from this laconic anfwer, that he did not feem deSirable of entering into particulars ; from his unwillingnefs to give any man unnecessary pain, dropped the fubjeQ:-Some general conversation concerning England, then passed, and Melvlll having bought what he wanted, was leaving the Shop; when, by Some accident, a ring dropped from the hoSier’s finger, which, being the nimbler of the two, our hero picked up, and was returning to its owner; when casting his eyes on it, he Saw under the chrystal, on a piece of white fattin, curiousty work’d with hair; the letters,
H
CC
over them was tied, a true-lover’s knot, the ends of which, were held by two turtle-doves, that were flying different ways; and on a label annexed, was the following Freach motto; le plus loin, le plus lih *
Having examined this ring very attentively for Some time, he exclaimed,—No, it is im-poffible; it can never beand returning it to the hofier, with a low bow, faid,-—Will ‘‘ you not. Sir, deem me very impertinent, if I “ defire you to favour me with an account how you came by this ring ?” “ By no means, (re-plied his countryman) it was given me Some years ago by a young lady, to whom I then “ had, and still have a most inviolable attach-
* The greater the distance, the tighter the knot is tied.
I 2	ment,
ip6 AMORAL NOVEL.
ment; she worked it as you fee, with her own “ hair ; and when she put it on, made me Swear never to part with it; which vow I mean « faithfully and Solemnly to obferve : the device I need not explain to you,*—the letters are “ equally the initials of either of our names, “ which I once flatter’d myfelf, would fome “ time or other be the fame; but adverfe fate ‘‘ ordain’d it otherwife : nor do I, at this inflant, “ know whether she is living or dead.”—While he was thus Speaking, Melvill’s countenance underwent Several changes; and obferving that he had finished, with great energy exclaiming, “ Yes, Sir, she lives; and you may both be “ happy.”
He instantly flew into his arms, crying, Good God ! that ever I should recognize my long lost friend, Charles Hartry, in the perSon of ‘‘ a hofier at Paris!”—Charles (for it was really him) beginning now to recolledit his friend and play-fellow, returned the ennbrace with equal ardor; and they mutually congratulated each other on fo unexpefled a meeting. When their first transports were in fome degree fubSided (Sir Charles, for Such the reader must know he was, though neither Melvill, or himfelf did) made tender inquiries after his own, and Mr. Howard’s family ; of both which Melvill gave him all the account he could ; nor did he forget to inform him of the happy change in Sir Thomas’s affedions..—He likewife related to him every cir-
cum-
A MORAL NOVEL. 197
cumstance of his Sister’s behaviour towards him ; as alfo all his adventures since that fatal day ; and concluded, by informing him of his intended journey to England, to which place, he now hoped, he would accompany him.
Sir Charles having no longer the fame reafons for abfenting himfelf as heretofore, readily coincided with his propofal: but feme time being necessary, for him to get rid of his businefs, our hero was detained longer at Paris, than he at first intended; which however, being on So agreeable an occasion, gave him very little concern.—During their journey, he gave Melvill the following account of his adventures, since his departure from Oak-hall, which he had purpofely referved as an amufement for that time.
1$	CHAP.
198 A MORAL NOVEL.
CHAP. XXXIX.
Oh happinefs! thou pleassng distant thought f Thro’ what variety of untried abfence.
Thro’ what new Scenes of anguish must I pafs }■ The wide uncertain profpeS, lies before me. While.clouds and Sunshine gain by turns upon it.
Anonymous,
IT is Surely unnecessary for me to inform my dear Melvill, of the reafons for my abrupt departure from Oak-hall; he must, during my stay there, have too often feen the unhappy caufe.
In my younger days, he must have obferved, that unjust taunts, and mepriSion were the only returns I received for duty and humility ; but being once arrived at a difcretionary age, when divested of every juvenile prejudice, I could fee things in their true light; and, finding it was not in my power to pleafe my father, by the most careful ashduity, I thought his behaviour justified me, in refolving at once to rid him of an objedt, which was fo difagreeable (thrice happy ! that I am no longer fo) and myfelf of a life that I was most heartly tired of, by endavour-ing to find that tranquillity among strangers, v/hich the unaccountable caprice of a parent
de-
A M O R A L N O V E L. 199 deprived me of at home. As it was in all probability, the last time I stould ever trouble him,
I made no Scruple of taking away fifty pounds, which he had given me to pay to Some tradef-men, and packing up a few cloaths in my portmanteau, I fet cut early one morning on my own horfe (as you must have heard) without communicating to any one what were my intentions ; nor do I stop to take one farewel of my most amiable Charlotte; though I now declare to you, that could I have had the least idea of what I afterwards fuffered, only from the consideration of the excruciating tortures, which my behaviour must necessarily give her, she never should have had So melancholy a caufe for her afflifition.	^
As London was a place which I had a most earnest desire to fee, I determined to go thither immediately ; and by getting employment, as a cl rk, in Some merchant’s compting-houfe (for which, by my education, I was very well qualified) at once make myfelf independent of him ; whom, by all the laws of nature, and paternal tendernefs, I had a right to expedl assistance from.
Accordingly arriving at the place of my destination, without any adventure worth troubling you with, I the next day difpofed of my horfe for twenty-five pounds; and thus finding mystlf master of near fourfcore guineas, determined to I 4	re-
200 A M O R A L N O V E L.
remain feme time out of employment, that I might have an opportunity of Satisfying my eager curiofity, by feeing every thing worth notice in London; and having expended near a fourth part of my capital, in Some unnecessary Superfluities, commenced the man of taste: I frequented a genteel coffee-houfe, w^as constant at the theatres, and all other public places of diversion ; which of courfe drew me into a numerous acquaintance; most of whom, by my appearance, mistaking me for Some newly fledged heir of quality, paid me their constant court, in hopes of having their share of my Spoils. And London had opened to me Such a Scene of falfe pleafure, that I had not been there many days, before I found my money reduced to Something under thirty pounds: I now conSidered that at the extravagant rate I went on, the remainder could not last long ; and therefore be- ~ gan feriousty to think of getting into fome employment; in order for which, I constantly read all the advertifements, in hopes of there meeting with Something to my purpofe; but to my great Sorrow, had every day the mortification of a disappointment.
I had now been in London a fortnight, and found myfelf no nearer the gaining of my point, than on the first night of my arrival; however, having still twenty pounds left, I thought, with irugality, it was a provifion for* fome months: and indeed, happy it was, that I proceeded with
Such
A MORAL NOVEL. 201 fnch prudence, as I should otherwise have lost the Sweetest SenSations that I ever enjoyed ; having in a short time after this,, an opportunity of employing almost my whole poffeflions in an a6l of charity ; you stare at hearing a man talk thus, in an age when many, whoSe riches are immenfe, would refuSe a shilling to assist a starving fellow-creature ; but SuppreSs your astonishment, tilt you have heard the particulars. Having one evening been prevailed upon to Sup at a tavern, where I had foolishly thrown away a couple of guineas, at the billiard table; I was walking home, condemning myfelf for my folly, when my attention was awakened in a very extraordk-nary manner.
It was between twelve and one o’clock in the morning ; when, passing by a genteel houfe, I heard the most violent Screams, which gave me reafon to SuSpe6t that Some injury was committing, on a perSon who, by the voice I knew to be a woman ; and prefently after I Saw the door opened, and Something white thrown with the greatest force into the middle of the street: but, gracious heaven! what was my astonishment, when, on my nearer approach, I found it to be a woman almost naked. By the assistance of the watch I helped her up, and having, with the greatest difficulty brought her to herfelf, she begg’d me, in the most Supplicating manner, “ to take pity “ on a wretch, whoSe only abode, without my “ generous assistance, must be in the street, at-I 5	“ once.;
202 A MORAL NOVEL.
‘‘ once expofed to the inclemency of the “ weather, and all the domineering info-“ lence of office.” I found by her manner of expression, that she once had known happier days. What her perfon was, it was impossible to difcern -her hair was difhevelled, and hung loofe upon her neck, which, with her eyes and face, was beat in a most terrible manner; however there was fomething altogether, which loudly called for my compassion ; and not being proof against her tears, I called a coach, and putting her into it, drove to my lodgings.
During our little journey, her tears feemed totally to impede all her powers of Speech ; nor were they at all abated, by the difficulty, which (on our arrival) I found in getting her admitted : my landlady objefted strongly against it, for the honour of her houfe; and indeed, every circumstance considered, there was nothing very unreasonable in her obje6fions; undoubtedly taking an unknown female, at that time, to a fingle man’s lodgings, carried far from a good aSpedt with it: however, as I stood pretty high in her good graces, by dint of perfuaSion I at last gained my point; and having resigned my bed to the stranger for that night, went to lie with another lodger in the houfe : but my mind was too full of this adventure, to fuffer me to get any rest. Rising very early, I ran to give a fuccindl account thereof to my landlady.; who being a good kind of woman (I do not mean according to the general
implication
A MORAL NOVEL. 203 implication of that term) I fancy, ssncerely believ’d all I faid, and, at my instigation, help’d this miserable unfortunate to Some cloaths ; to whom as Soon as she was drefs’d, I Sent my compliments, deSiring her company to breakfast ; and having returned a Suitable anfwer to my mef-fage ; she, in a few minutes, enter’d the room, where I was waiting for her.
She was a tall, genteel, well-made woman, and notwithstanding her eyes, and the other parts of her face, bore apparent marks of the bruifes she had received ; I could still distinguish that she was handfome :—her teeth were remarkably fine, and as her drefs now in Some meafure, corresponded with the dignity of her figure; she had an undoubted right to the title of a fine woman.
On her entrance, I Saw that she wanted to fay Something to me, but could not; I faw the gratitude of her heart hanging upon her lips, and pressing for utterance ; confcious, that she felt more than she had the power to exprefs: I arofe, and endeavoured to relieve her, by enquiring after her health ; I then led her to a chair, v/here she was no Sooner Seated, than the fenfe of the obligations she had to me, overcame her, and bursting into tears; she cried, Oh Sir ! what shall “ 1 fay to you ?•—how }>—in what manner shall I thank you ?—but words are insufficient, far, far too feint, to exprefs the feelings of my foul,
« at
204 A MORAL NOVEL.
“ at this interesting, minute; and although I am convinced, that a man who could have the heart to do Such an a6l, must judge what my fenfations are ; still I (hall never be able to re-turn you Sufficient thanks, for your goodnefs to a poor wretch, who, without your astist-ance, by this time, would have been no more.”—
“ Oh Sir,—^you may now enjoy the moral. Social Satisfafifion of having Snatch’d from per-** dition, a perSon, in the complicated distreffes “ of nakedneSs,—and want; and what is still’ “ much worSe, loaded with a Self-reproaching conscience.”—
I never in my whole life, had more oceaSioa for words, than at this instant, and never made a worfe ufe of them, I wifh’d to fay Something to Sooth her feelings ; but for a long time, was at a lofs:—the dignity of her appearance, join’d to the penetrating foftneSs of her tears, quite overcame me; and it was not, till after a long filence, that I recolledled mySelf So far, as to beg she would not distreSs me, by faying any more on a Subjefb .equally painful to us both ;—* to assure her, that 1 had done nothing, but what I hop’d every man would have done in the fame Situation : from which (as it was but my duty) I could claim no merit; and that, if I really had any, I was fufficiently over-paid, by the con-fciouSnefs of having aded right;—that as I was
a man,
A MORAL NOVEL. 205 a man, I could not fee the distresses of my fellow-creatures, and divest myfelf of tender feelings nor indeed would I have parted with them, at that moment, for the wealth of the Indies.
She now feem’d fomething compos’d, and I had the fatisfadion of feeing her eat Some breakfast ; after which, she again thank’d me in the politest manner, and in terms, • which at once shew’d her gratitude and good fenfe; though at the fame time she loaded herfelf with reproaches,, as the caufe ©f all her misfortunes, and feem’d but little short of a state of abfolute defpera-tion.—
I endeavour’d to folace her afili£fions, by begging that she would look upon me, as a perfon, ihclin’d to do every thing in his power to Serve her; and then represented to her the sinfulnefs> of not placing a just hope in providential protection ; she thank’d me for my friendly intentions, and added, “ that were I acquainted with. “ her history, I should not only blame and def-« pife, as much as I was now inclined to ferve* her.”—
My reply was natural, and came of courSe,—-I could not think fo, and that if a recital of “ her story would not give her too much pain, by the recollection of past misfortunes, she “ could not oblige me more, than by favouring
me
2o6 a MORAL NOVEL.
« me with it—she reply’d, “ that my behavi-our gave me an undoubted right to know it, and^ notwithstanding it would unavoidably recall to her mind, things she could wish ever to forget: « and though she must run the hazard of for-feiting my good opinion, by laying open to « my view, the catalogue of follies, or rather « vices, she had been guilty of; neverthelefs,. « she could refufe nothing to a perfon to whom « she had So powerful an obligation, and ac-« cordingly instantly related it—to which, as it may ferve for a good lesion to all young people of the female fex; and will not be totally ufelefs to ours : I shall make no Scruple of begging your attention, I give it in her own words, which were as you will find in the following chapter.
CHAP. XL.
„	«■—— Better I were distra6l.
So should my thoughts be fever’d from my griefs And woes, by wrong imaginations lofe.
The knowledge of themfelves.
King Lear.
IN order to infpire you with a just idea of my own misfortunes, I must first give you Some account of my family, as from one unworthy r part thereof, all my unhappinefs has proceeded:
my
A MORAL NOVEL. 207
my father (whofe name was Barton) was a gentleman of good estate in Gloucesterstiire; when I fay good, I would be understood to mean, that it was amply Sufficient to purchafe every real necessary of life, though not large enough to furnish the ridiculous and prejudicial Superfluities,, which his openneSs of heart wished to command, and which he was imprudently determin’d, at any rate to procure; you will excufe me. Sir, for thus touching upon the frailties of a parent ; but as you have an undoubted right to my most candid ingenuity, I must acknowledge, that extravagance was his foible, and has been my ruin.
He married my mother (with whom he had a fortune of five thoufand pounds) while he was very young, and from the uniform propriety of her conduiSt, had never any occafion to repent of his choice ; about a year after which, sihe was brought to bed of a daughter, who (being the first tender pledge of mutual love) call’d for all the attention of her parents, which they, in their fondnefs readily bestow’d j nor while a child, was her innocent prattle ever tirefome, rather ever new ; and in the extatic moments of parental joy, they too vainly thought their happinefs complete ; but alas! how was that felicity damp’d, to have the mortification of obferving, (when ] their daughter was arriv’d at that period of life, where the difpcSition being no longer hid by the inadvertent Sallies of a Sprightly youthfulnefs, |
begins
20^ A MORAL NOVEL, begins to shew itfelf in its true colours;) that she was ill-temper’d to excefs, peevish, discontented, and to crown all, possessed of a heighth of malevolent pride, that muss necessarily render her odious to every beholder ; in short, she was totally destitute of that affability and complaifance,, which alone can make every young lady agreeable.
No wonder, that her parents did not feel the fame cordiality of affection for her, that they would have done, for one of whom they had lefs reafon to complain ; but as all the powers of nature, stirring within, still informed them that she^ was their child.——No circumstance in their behaviour, ever indicated the least want of a true parental regard !—her wishes were her will nor would it have been possible for her to ob-ferve the alteration in, their hearts, had. they not found another object on whom to bestow their tendernefs,—I mean mySelf; who was born when', my Sister was about fifteen years old.
It is easier for you to imagine, than me to defcribe, the joy (as I have since been informed), which my father felt upon this occasion ;—I quickly became a favourite with the whole family, except my Sister, by whom I' was Secretly as much detested, as I was admired by my parents ; which in their abfence she always took care to express, by the most cruel treatment; not that.it arofe from confcioufnefs of having lost’
a place
A MORAL NOVEL. 209
a place in their hearts; but her pride could ill brook fo powerful a rival therein as myfelf; and out of a falfe Spirit of refentment, at the age of two-and-twenty, fhe went off with a neighbouring baronet, for she had external charms to attrafl a man of gallantry; with whom, after a long Search, her parents heard she lived in a most Scandalous manner, in open defiance ©f every law of modesty or honour.
Her afflicted father, imagining that an alienation of his affections was the caufe of this imprudent step, wrote to her, in the most foothing and affeClionate terms, earnestly intreating her to return, and promiSing to receive her with open arms;—freely to forget and forgive all her past behaviour: when, would you you thinkthat equally infenfible to the just-nefs of his remonstrances, and the tender kind-nefs of his Solicitations, she had the cruelty to return for anfwer, “ that she would never con-‘‘ form to all the capricious whims of a younger brat, while she had the means of existence ia her own hands ; and could live without the astlstance of thofe, whom the world called , her friends.’*
Oh, Sir, think what my poor father must feel at this instant I to fee his own daughter in the down-hill road towards perdition; lost to. every fenfe of duty to her parents, or her God.,
I was^
210 A MORAL NOVEL.
I was too young to experience any degree of afflidtion; but, being completely blessed in the intire affe£fions of my parents, whole love for their darling Seemed every moment to increaSe.
My juvenile years passed in the most pleasing and harmonious manner. — Thus happy,'— inattentive did I live; nor ever knew what it was to feel the pangs of agonizing Sorrow, till my dear mother’s death, which happened when I was about sixteen years old.—-—
With her I might justly fay, departed all my joy;—thrice happy had I been, if heaven, in commiferation of my youth and inexperience, had kindly fuffered one grave to have contained, us both;—but fate referved me for Superior woe :—fure I was born beneath the influence of an unlucky planet, which on the thread of my existence, stamped the party-coloured doom of mifery.
The poignancy of that affliflion, which, from the tender Sensibility of my father’s nature, he must of courSe be fuppofed to have felt, for the lofs of fo good, fo loved a wife, gave rife to a diforder, in which, after having lingered for near a twelvemonth, his physicians assured him to be in the last stage of a confirmed consumption ; and the fatigue which I underwent in attending him, through every gradation of this siattcring malady, joined to my grief for the
approaching
AMOARLNOVEL. 211
approaching death of the tenderest, best of parents, foon rendered me much more fit to lull in Soft repofe, than to experience the heartfelt toil of nightly watching by a sick father’s, bed.
In short. Sir, not to trouble you with any unnecessary particulars, his distemper Seemed every moment to increaSe; and finding the fatal moment of his dissolution nigh, he called me to him, when gently pressing my hand, his feeble eyes, half drowned in briny tears, he pronounced words, which made fo deep an impression on my young mind, as never to be erafed, but by the all-fubduing hand of time.
“ Oh, my dear child (cried he) how shall I I dare to look up to you for forgivenefs ?—— In what words shall I intreat you to pardon me, for the most attrocious crime that parent “ e’er was guilty of?—^—
. Oh my Betfy, I have cruelly deceived << you;—nay, I have deceived my Self and all the world my unbounded love for you, has made me inattentive to my own concerns I “ have lived too fast, and have now the agonizing “ reflexion, that 1 must quickly leave you, “ liable to every infult, which unguarded virtue meets with, without having it in my power to «« provide for your Subsistence; at a time too, when, from your age, you have most need
« of
212 A MORAL NOVEL.
“ of Some experienced hand, to guide your ** unwary youth, through this wide, precarious, “ and turbulent world -my whole estate is mortgaged for more than its real worth ;—» a falfe mistaken pride, with an unguarded, “ therefore ill-applied, generosity, have been “ my ruin :—my only care has been, to appear insignificantly grand, in the eyes of that “ world (who must hereafter inevitably deSpife « me) at a time, when all my attention should “ have been fixed upon your future establish-“ ment and felicity.—When my poor eyes are clofed in endlefs night, what will you alone “ —helplefs, and innocent do ? — no friendly « counfellor to advife ;—no hand to lead your young feet, thro* the broad path of vice, “ which opens fuch a Scene of tempting, dan-“ gerous pleafure to inexperienced youth, that “ they perforce must yield to it, and for a single ** moment of fenfe-deluding gratification,—-un-“ dergo a life, perhaps an eternity of future « woe.-——But my child, arm yourfelf with refolution, and when I am no longer prefent to astist you,—remember the last precepts of
« a dying parent.---Confide in the all-wife
“ Being;—do not distrust him,—and he will “ never forfake you ; nor let the flowery, eye-catching paths of fenfual enjoyment, tempt « you to depart from the thorny difficult one oi « virtue,”
o* Whil!?-
A MORAL NOVEL. 213
‘‘ White you are virtuous, my child, you may be happy in yourfelf, and defpife the vanities of a mistaken world ;—do thus while “young;—and when the. stealing steps of age “ draw on, — you will be delivered from the tortures of a lelf-condemnation, and the in-“ fluence of shame, remorfe, or terrorem-“ brace religion with fervent cordiality, and be “ happy; for all her ways are pleafantnefs, and all her paths are	Then clafping
his hands, with uplifted eyes, he added, “ still “ may the omnipreSent Providence look down “ with pity on your youth, and by his power “ condu6l; you guiltlefs, through that intricate “ maze of wickednefs in which you are placed ;
—So, when Supported by the Sweet influence “ of a balmy hope, you will never lost the “ innocen e of heart of which you are now possessed ; nor, when bowing under compli-cated distresses, fink under the gloom deSpair.”
Here his voice failed him ; and in a few moments he funk into eternity, leaving me an orphan, destitute of every necessary of life.
Forgive Sir, (Said she, bursting into tears) forgive this tribute, which nature requires me to pay to the memory of a poor, fond, though indifcreet father ; on whom I can never think, but with a reverential awe.—Having indulged her commendable filial grief, for a few moments, she proceeded as follows.
CHAP.
214 A MORAL NOVEL. CHAP. XLI.
Oh what avails, how once appear’d the fair. When from gay equipage, she falls obfcure.
In vain she lifts her livid lips in pray’r.
What man fo mean, to recolleft the poor !
From place to place by unfee’d bailiffs drove As fainting fawns, from thirsty blood-hounds fly ; See the fad repinants of unhallow’d love I In prifons perish, or on dunghills die.
Anonymous.
I Found all that he had faid, with regard to his affairs, but too stridlly true ; for as foon as his death was known, his creditors instantly Seized upon his effects, which they fold to pay themfelves as far as they would go.
Thus situated, you can but imperfeflly imagine the distrefs 1 was in.—The houfe and estate were the property of a gentleman, to whom they were mortgaged; and who politely gave me leave to remain there, till I had an opportunity of providing for myfelf elfewhere.
Not to dwell too long on fo melancholy a fubjeft, my father had been dead about a week, when I was Surprized by a visit from a lady, of whom I had no knowledge.—1 had indeed. Some confufed idea of her face; but no particular remembrance of it; however, not fuffering me
to
A MORAL NOVEL. 215
•to remain long in this uncertainty, Ihe made herfelf known to me, in the perSon of my eldest sister ; and addresting me in the most affe^ionate manner,—with marks of a real penitence, confessed the crimes she had been guilty of; and added, “ that time having brought her to a ‘Oust fenSe thereof, she had perfuaded Sir Henry Rakish (the baronet with whom she went off) to marry her; but that heaven did “ not permit them long to enjoy their happy ‘‘ union, her hushand having died about two years before, leaving her mistrefs of a hand-fome fortune.”—She added, that after her “ behaviour, she thought it to no purpofe, to “ attempt a reconciliation, during her father’s ^‘life-time.; but hearing of his death, and the* ^ circumstances oi his affairs, she could not “ bear, that So near and deferving a relation should want, while it was in her power to assist her;” and concluded, by insisting on my going to live with her.—*—As I had before heard of the death of the above-mentioned baronet, I made no Scruple of believing all she faid to be true ; which were welcome tidings to a perfon in my distressed situation: we therefore, the next morning. Set out for London, at which place we arrived without any material accident.
I had now no reafon to complain of my lot, -as my sister behaved to me v/ith -the greatest •tenderneSs and affeflion.
For
2i6 a moral novel.
For three weeks I thought myfelf, and really was, completely happy. She went but very little abroad, tho’ there was no day pasted, in which she was not vistted by a number of gentlemen, most of whom took particular notice of me; but as I thought it no more than they would have done of any other young perfon, not totally destitute of beauty, I looked upon all the compliments which were made me, as things of courfe, and therefore paid no further attention to them.
There was one gentleman in particular, whofe name was Hartop, who always behaved with an uncommon degree of politenefs and warm civility; and as he was really an agreeable man, I will confefs that I was very much pleafed with his conversation.
I was frequently alone with him, when he never behaved in any manner, that was not consistent with the striftest referve and delicacy ; nor had I the least fufpicion of the villany of his intentions, till one particular day, when having dined with us, my sister left us alone, faying, that she had Some businefs which would not detain her long, and begged me to entertain Mr. Hartop till her return.
We had not been together many minutes, before he began to take Some unjustifiable liberties with me ; whereat I was (as you may ima-
ghie)
A MORAL NOVEL. 217
glne) exceedingly astonilhed, and defined to know what he had ever feen in my behaviour, to authorize fuch proceedings ? but he only laughed, at what he called my airs; and beginning to be intolerably rude, caught me in his arms, and having infulted me with language, too grofs for me to repeat, avowed the bafeneSs of his intentions.
On my crying out, he begged me to be Silent; to induce me to which, he added, that my noife would be but little regarded in an houfe of that kind.
Difengaglng myfelf, 1 defir’d to know w'hat he meant by casting reflexions on my Sister’s habitation?—but he would not enter into any altercation ; and catching me again in his arms, notwithstanding my utmost struggles, would foon have overcome me, had it not been for a great cry of fire, which made him leave me, in order to take care of himfelf; but luckily, the alarm was occafioned by nothing more, than a chimney at the next houfe.
On running up stairs In my fright, I there found my good Sister, whom I had imagined to be out, which added to what Hartop had faid, raifed in my breast fome thoughts, not much to her honour or humanity, however, I thought proper to keep them to myfelf for the preSent, VoL. II.	K	only
ai8. A MORAL NOVEL, only determining to be more circumfpeQ: for the future.
After expressing my astonishment at finding her there, I inform’d her of Hartop’s behaviour, and desired that she would never again leave me alone with him ; in reply to which, she told me, that she was just returned home, and had as well as myfelf, on the cry of sire, run up “ stairs,” and then flew out in the most bitter terms against Hartop, faying, “ that she was “ amazed at his infolence, in daring to offer any rudenefs to a perfon beneath her roof,— “ and vowed she would never fpeak to him again ;—for that as I was under her protedlion, she should look upon it as an affront offered to herfelf, and would let him know it.”—
In purfuance of this determination, she instantly wrote a note, wherein she acquainted him with her refolution, though (as 1 have since been informed) she took care that he should never receive it.
Thus by’ this well-counterfeited anger, did she intirely hush my former fufpicions, and 1 really believed, that she had no concern in the plot ; though I am now convinced, it was a premeditated contrivance of her owm to ruin me ; but the affectionate cordiality of her behaviour, -would not then Suffbr me to entertain any thoughts injurious to her honour; and I was
again
A M O R A L N O V E L. 219 again giving mySelf up to the enjoyment of that golden dream of happinefs, which my luxurious fancy had painted, when my eternal peace of mind, was at once destroyed, by the cruel artifices, of that bafe, defigning woman, under whofe prote6lion I had placed myfelf, and v/hom natural affeffion, should have made a fecond parent.
She one night, out of a pretended indulgence (as she faid) to difpel that gloom from my countenance, which my father’s death had occasioned, and which was not yet worn off; carried me to the play, which being a diversion I had never before been a partaker of, I was not a little pleafed with my evening’s entertainment.
When we came out of the theatre, to my great Surprize, the Servant who had been ordered to meet us, was not to be found; and having looked for him fome time in vain, least I should catch cold, by coming immediately from So in-tenfe heat, into the night air; my officious sister, insisted on my stepping into an adjoining / tavern, till a coach could be called, which I was too easily induced to agree to : and thus, under the hypocritical mark of friendship, and an affefted concern for my welfare, did she Seduce me to my ruin.
To my inutterable astonishment, I found that she was extremely well known at the houfe, K 2	and
£20 A M O R A L N O V E L.
and being at her deSire, condufiled into a room. Some wine was brought, of which I unluckily drank a glafs or two, but do not remember any thing farther which past’d that night.
I only know, that when I awak’d in the morning, I found myfelf in a Situation, not to be defcribed,—in a strange room, depriv’d in one fatal night, of ail, my foul held dear ;—my virtue !—and my fame;—when, to add to my misfortune, I Saw in my undoer, the villain Hartop.—
Educated as I had been, with the stridlest fenfe
of female chastity;-----think Sir, — oh think,
what must be ray fenfations, at that dread moment^—grief, deSpair, and anger, by turns pof-fested my foul :—I rav’d,—I tore my hair,—I beat my breast,—and was for Some time, quite frantic.—
Exhausted paflion at length gave way to the more moderated grief of reafon, and I began feriousty to confider, that it was to no purpofe, to attempt, t.o pevenge mystif:—my honour ‘was gone, nor was it in any human power to restore its fpotlest, purity.
I might then, w/ith stri61 propriety, repeat the lines of our mellifluous Waller :
O that
A M O R A L N O V E L. 221
O that I had my innocence again !
My untouch’d honour! but I wifh in vain ;
The fleece, that by the dyer, once was stain’d,. Never again, its native whitenefs gain’d.
Although I was now thoroughly perfuaded, that this was a mercenary Scheme of my vile Sistfr’s ; nevertheless, as (he was the only perSon whom I knew in town, I weakly determin’d to apply to her, and flatter’d mySelf, that when she began candidly to reflect upon her actions, she might take pity on my helpleSs, injur’d youth and innocence ; and therefore immediately proceeded to her houSe, but was inform’d by the Servant, that “ she was out,”—
Out,” (re-ecchoed I, knowing it to be inv poflible,)—but the wretchedneSs of my situation, at that instant, striking on my mind in its full force ; turning away with tears trembling in my Swollen eyes; I had only the power to exclaim, —good heav’n I”—my astlidfion, touch’d the heart of the Servant, who, re-calling me, inform’d me that my sister had order’d herfelf to be deny’d,*—that she had been Instrumental to my ruin, by having pre-concerted the Scheme which had been made ufe of;—and that I was not the only innocent perfon by many, whofe happinefs she had destroyed in the like manner.-—
K 3	1 thank’d-
222, A M O R A L N O V E L.
I thank’d him for an information of what, I but too Strongly fufpedied before, nor could I help lamenting to him, that any perfon, whofe heart (like his) was Softened with the least drop of gentle pity, (hould find his habitation there.
Then bursting into tears, ‘‘ infamous woman, , (cry’d I) who devoid of every particle of hu-man tenderneSs, or relative affetsiion, is not content with having totally destroyed her own peace of mind, but like an infernal fiend, would plunge me in ; and for a pecuniary recompence, destroy the happineSs of an only “ lister.”
Without virtue !—without friends to advife or prote6f, I was half distra6ted, and walked along, not knowing whither I was going.—•
I had luckily in my pocket, a twenty pound bank note, which my father had given me previous to his death ; and having tired myfelf with wandering to no purpofe, hired a lodging Suitable to the poverty of my situation.
CHAP.
A MORAL NOVEL. 223
CHAP. XLIL
Expofe thySelf to feel, what wretches feel.
That thou may’st Ihake the fuperflux to them,. •And shew the heav’ns more just.
King Lear..
Having attentively revolved in my mind, what was the most probable method tO' gain a reputable livelihood, which would furnish me, if not with happinefs, at least with temporary eaSe; I at length fixed upon the only plaufible one that prefented itfelf; {videlicet,) that of going to Service ; which refolution, I communicated to my landlady, who generousty believed my story, and promifed me her friendly astistance, in getting a place.
In the mean time, I wrote to Several people, who had formerly been friends of my father’s ; Setting forth my distrefs, and Supplicating their relief,"-—-from Some I received no anfwer,— from others, Scorn and reviling;—in short, mockery, contempt, and negle6t, were the only returns I received for meeknefs and humility.
By the recommendation of my landlady, with whom I foon became a great favourite,) by shewing an industrious difpoSition ; I went after Several K 4	places,:
224 A MORAL NOVEL.
places, but my having no one to give me a Sufficient chara6i;er, was a material and just objeclionj with every body.
I was thus therefore obliged to sit down contented with the mifery of my situation, without any profpeSl of comfort, for the prefent, or provision for the future; when to add to my wretched-nefs, I found my Self with child ; my money was near gone, and I now began to experience, all the torments of approaching penury and want; —my landlady was my only friend, and Ihe (poor woman) had it not in her power to assist me far, •—all that Ihe could, fhe did, being amply pof-fessed of humane feelings, thofe riches of the mind, tho’ poor in worldly pofTessions.
V/hen my time drew near, I grew more poignantly wretched,—my cloaths went piece by piece, for a prefent Subsistence ; and I was at last delivered of a dead child, being void of common necessaries,—with Scarcely bread to eat, or garments to cover me,—I have often since, wonder’d how it was possible to» Support myfelf, through So Severe a trial, as I might have exclaimed with Jaffier.
There’s not a wretch, that lives on common charity, But’s happier than I am ; for I’ve known The luxurious Sweets of plenty, ev’ry night. Have ssept with Soft content about my head.
And never wak’d, but to a joyful morning :
Yet
A MORAL NOVEL. 225 Yet now must fall, like a full ear of corn.
Whole bloITom’s fcap’d, yet’s wither’d in the ripening.
But not to trefpafs on your time and patience, in this day of heavy afflidiion ; I stiould certainly have peristed, had it not been for the goodnefs of m'y charitable hostefs, who assisted me, even to an injury of herfelf; and without her generous in-terposstion, I stould once have been turn’d naked, and pennylefs into the street, by a perfon to whom fhe owed fome money, v*?ho Said, that it was becaufe fhe kept lodgers, who could not pay, that he was fo long depriv’d of his due, and was therefore coming up to execute his cruelty, and at the fame time to reproach me whth my crime ; when this good woman interpos’d in my behalf,, faying,—that, if I was innocent, it was inexcuf-ble barbarifm in him ;—if guilty, I had load, enough to bear, without the Severity of his re-flefsions:—which welhapply’d truth, had the desir’d effedi, and fav’d me from immediate, ruin.-—
Amidst thefe accumulated misfortunes, I still had the fatisfadion of knowing, they were not the confequences of my own wickednefs, and therefore, without any reproaches of conscience had still thofe balmy inexpressible feelings, attendant on opprefs’d virtue.—
K 5	Though.
225 A M O R A L N O V E L.
Though I was unhappy, I was not yet culpable ;—O that I could now fay So, with the fame truth; and that I had never experienced the many miferies, which for ever wait upon once lost purity notwithstanding all my Sufferings, heaven endowed me with Superior constitution, and I at last recover’d strength; but what was the conSequence ?—to become a Scandal to my Sex, and odious to myfelf without money, without friends,—and yet with Some remains of beauty left;—what could I do ?—I had no hopes from my unnatural lister,—to procure a fervic6 (I found) was impradlicable, — my charadier was gone ; nor did I know any one, who would be refponstble for my honesty.—
In thefe distrefsful circumstances, must I con-fefs to you, what courfe I took ?—no,—you must but too eafily guefs it,—and Save me'the painful repetition of my guilt,—with reafon may you stnidder,—I do myfelf; at the horrid recol-leilion ;—yes. Sir,—prostitution, shameful prostitution, was the lot of that perfon, who once had lived in all the Splendour and expence of flattering indulgence ; in which detestable. Scandalous manner, I have existed for thefe two last years: but to recount all the various vicissitudes of fortune, that I have experienced within that short Space of time, would be tedious, and perhaps offensive.—
Upon
A M O R A N O V E L. 227
Upon a general review, you would find me Sometimes wallowing in all the affluence and difll-pation, which luxurious fancy could invent;-^ at others, bowing beneath the complicated miseries of want, infamy, and ficknefs,—obligedi for a prefent fubSiffence, to give up all thoughts of my eternal welfare,—-by finking myfelf a degree below the brutes,—occafionally to flatter, and carefs a man my foul abhorred ;—if T looked round, I Saw none, but wretches like or worfe than, myfelf, who, dead to every nicer fenfe of shame, or honour, would prostitute their very fouls for hire —-oaths, blafphemies, and imprications, were their constant difcourfe ; — all which, and much more, than it is in the power of words to defcribe, I was obliged to undergo ; how justly does Rowe, in defcribing the lives of thefe out>» casts of Society, fay,.
To know no thought of rest, to have the mind Still minist’ring fresh plagues, as in a circle. Where one dishonour, treads upon another. What know the fiends beyond it b
Oh heaven ! did vvomen but ferioufly confider. the gulph of wretchednefs, into which they plunge themfelves, when once they adopt vicious ^ meaSures, how earnestly would they endeavour to preferve their virtue,—even though it were but in appearance yet all this I could bear with patience,—if I may be allowed the exprestion ;. my bodily Sufferings, were the lightest part of
myr
■2zS A MORAL NOVEL.
my woe, they were trifling, in comparison of the reproaching stings of tyrant confcience, which one minuet’s recollection, never failed to bring : ——if ever I thought feriousty,—it near turn’d me mad,—I could not bear it;—and, give me leave to obferve to you, that it is for this reafon we fee fo many of thefe unhappy women, in hopes of obtaining Some refpite from their tortures, as their only refource, flying to that odious vice of drinking,—which, being what I could never be prevailed on to praCtice ; 1 perhaps * felt my misfortunes more Severely than any other; for every moment informed me, how fatally repugnant, my prefent courfe of life was, to all hopes of eternal blestednefs, though at the fame time, I had it not in my power to take any step, towards procuring my pardon.—
For how’ could I attempt to ope my lips in prayer to that God, in violation of whofe most facred laws, I was daily living.—
This thought (from which, notwithstanding my utmost efforts, my attention was Scarcely ever divided,) harrowed up my foul, and strewed continual thorns acrofs my path.—
Many, many tinges have I pray’d for death, to hide me and my shame, from the obferving world ;—for where on earth, was comfort to be met with for a wretch like me.
I have
A M O R A L N O V E L. 229
I have Sometimes, in hopes of finding it, excluded myfelf from all Society ; but, though I could fly far from the Scene of guilty pleafures, still I could not Ihun myfelf,—to have forgot my own wickednefs; I must have refigned or violently stopped all the powers of fenfation: the former I could not do, and the latter I had grace enough to avoid.
I have endeavoured to drown recolleflion, in a continual round of noiSe and dilfipation ;—but nature cannot always live upon the stretch ; arxl if one Serious paufe interven’d, then— (cried Ihe, clapping her hand upon her breast)—I found my judgment here ;—here I felt more than can be expressed.
^'he only amufement that endowed me with the least tranfient degree of tranquillity, was reading ; and that, tho’ it mollified my Sorrows for the prefent, could not effediually divert my thoughts, from the only fubjedl I detested : I too painfully found, that study and penfive retirement, though they may footh for a time, in the main give additional force to natural or acquired melancholy.
After I have told you the heart-rending troubles, which we poor wretches are doom’d to Suffer, and many others, that it is impossible for me to give you the least idea of! will you not
be
230 A M ORAL N O V E L.
be very much Surprized, when I assure you that,, out of the number of unhappy prostitutes, which infest this town, very few are to be met with,, who do not deferve the title of fenfible ?.
Impossible you’ll Say, that fenSible women would lay themfelves open to the many miferies which, in Such a state they must necessarily meet with ;—I agree with you, that nothing can be a, stronger proof of their imprudence, tho’ not of weak understanding : and Sorry I am to add, that by far the greatest part of them may, with juS-t'ice attribute their afflidtions to the perfidious hypocriSy of your Sex ; nay, parents themfelves are frequently in a great meaSure accessary thereto; for, if a girl who has no other fault than her attachment to a worthless objedf of af-fe6;ion, has (as is commonly the cafe) in any unguarded hour, been drawn in, under the most: Sacred promiSes of marriage, to commit a tref-paSs on virtue, stie may for ever repent of;-— the doors of her parents, and the whole world, are instantly fhut against her.
Without friends,—without virtue; she mush be an amazing instance of laudable prudence, not to revenge herSelf upon herSelf, by falling into a courSe of infamy and by thus making that vice, which before was but inattention, ruin herSelf for ever.
Here
A M O R A L N O V E L. 231
Here I cannot help obferving, that the injustice of the world is no where more apparent, than in the distinfsion made, in the cenfures pasted upon the frailties of the two fexes: is it not hard. Sir, that man, a lawlefs libertine, may roam,—commit at large every folly,— every vice which youth, intemperance, or his vicious inclinations prompt him to, and he shall not Suffer in the eyes of the world ?—v/hen, if woman, poor, weak woman (who being most liable to fall, should have greater allowances made)—if she deviates ever So little from the narrow path of virtue, immediate ruin is the inevitable conSequence.
The generality of the world cruelly imagine, that when a woman has lest one virtue, she can never recover that goodnefs of principles, she has So imprudently thrown away ; but I stand a fatal example, to the injustice of Such an affer-tion however time immemorial, having render’d it, an almost thoroughly received opinion, every attempt to abolish it must be vain, and fall of itfelf.———Therefore to turn to my story.
Being thoroughly Satiated and harrasted, with the infamy attendant on this deplorable courSe of life, I once determined (by learning fome trade, whereby I should be enabled to get my livelihood in an honest manner) to draw myfelf out of
it)
232 A MORAL NOVEL, it; for which purpofe I Saved all the money I could, and learn’d the millinery businefs.
Having the good luck to Succeed therein, I had almost recovered my peace of mind, when ano’-ther of the trade, envious of my fuccefs, found means to steal a quantity of fine lace, belonging to a lady of quality,, which was then in my poffestion.
There was no one but what believhl me guilty of the theft or fraud ;—in vain did I assert my innocence as I had not money to replace the goods, I lost my custom, and thought myfelf happy, in not being profecuted for a robbery.
I now found myfelf in the fame deplorable situation as before ; at last was taken into keeping, by a single gentleman, which Sheer necessity forced me to accept..
With him I lived much happier than hereto^ fore ; being no longer fubjefit to the pinching gripes of unhous’d poverty ; and flatter’d myfelf, that by my behaviour, I Ihould be able to retain his affefilions, tillT had faved money enough to re-establish me in my businefs, in fome obfeure corner of the kingdom, where my unhappy story, was not know ;—but alas I I still was doom’d to be the fport of fortune ; for the gentleman with whom I lived, coming home one day in liquor, found me talking to a tradefman> of whom I
was
A MORAL NOVEL. 253 was ordering Some goods ; and though he did not mention any thing at the time, on his return in the evening, he stripp’d me, and having beat me in a most cruel manner, reproached me with a crime I never had been guilty of,-r-inconstancy to him;—and, as a proof thereof, named the tradefman he had feen in the morning.
In vain did I protest my innocence ;—he turned me naked into the street, as you faw ; where I should certainly have perished, had it not been for your unmerited, unexampled kindnefs.
This Sir, is my history, without difguife or palliation ; and if 1 have been guilty of great faults, I hope you will think them rather the confe-quence of irreSistibje necelTity, than cultivated vice ; and that I am therefore more deferving cf your pity than contempt,
'CHAP.
234 A MORAL NOVEL
CHAP. XLIII.
The qualify of mercy is not strain’d.
It droppeth like a gentle rain from heav’n Upon the place beneath ; it is twice bleSs’d,
It bleffeth him that gives and her that takes.
Merchant of Venice.
Thus (continued Sir Charles) did Mils-Barton finish her painful history ; throughout which there appeared fuch an air of unaffected ingenuity and perfedt contrition, that I could not dishelieve her.
There is a certain charm in probity, which strikes upon the mind, like light upon our eyes; —convidiion attends it: and if what she had told me was really true (as indeed i had no reafon to fufpedt the contrary) I thought her much to be pitied; nay own, I felt myfelf deeply interested in her future welfare; therefore made her an offer of my lodging, which, with a great many apologies, for the trouble she had already given, me,—out of a principle of delicacy, she modestly declined, and would have instantly departed; but confeious that she had no other friend to apply to, and that negle£l must renew her wretched Scenes of life again, I would not fuffer itI could not bear, that a perfon, whofe temporal, and perhaps Spiritual welfare I had So much already
A MORAL NOVEL. 235
ready contributed to, should again throw her-, fclf away, from a punctilio of civility ; and therefore insisted on her remaining where she was, till I could find her Some employment in the millinery businefs, which I determined immediately to look out for ; and, to my great fatisfafition, in a few days had the luck of meeting with a perfon, whofe health obliging her to retire from London, she was willing to yield up her shop, on the condition of being paid half the profits thereof, during her life-time :—and, on the recommendation of my landlady, who procured Security, I had in a short time the pleafure of conducting Mils Barton to her new habitation.
I never heard Such exprestions of sincere gratitude, as this generous. Sensible, though abufed creature made me ;—(exprestions were the only way she had of shewing it) and, on my pre-fenting her with ten pounds for immediate ufe, I had the inexprestible pleafure of hearing that she thought herfelf completely happy :—and though I considerably distressed myfelf by assisting her, I must own, that an innate fatisfaCHon, preferable to all the riches of this world, shed a pleasing balm upon my delighted heart.
I now found my cash reduced to a very low ebb, and therefore grew every day more Solicitous about getting Some employment; and as heaven will never Suffer any one to experience
the
236 A MORAL NOVEL.
the least inconveniency for having performed a good a6lion ; I, in a short time was recommended to a young gentleman, who was going to Antigua, to take poffestion of a large estate, and wanted a perfon to attend him as a companion de Voyage. Although it was not my intention to leave England, neverthelefs, as the terms offered me were very good, and as I was naturally of a volatile difpoSition, I made no Scruple of determining to accompany Mr. Morten to Antigua ; and accordingly in a few weeks fet fail for that place.
Knowing that nothing was more likely to render dependance tolerable, than to acquire my patron’s esteem ; I determined to find out his foibles (if he had any) that I might play my cards in the most fuitable manner, without degrading my owm nature.
By a little circumfpc6;lon, 1 foon difeovered that he was far from fenfible ;—confequently exceeding vain of his perfonal qualifications,— and not a little addidied to the fashionable follies of the age : but to give you, in two words, a just idea of his charadier,—he might, with the stridlest propriety, be stiled a mere petit maitre.
Thus circumstanced, I had nothing to do, but to ufe his own weapons against himfelf; and was therefore constantly approving the elegance
A MORAL NOVEL. 237
gance cf his figure,—the neatnefs of his leg, See. By which means I ingratiated myfelf fo far in his favour, that before we arrived at ihe end of our voyage, my will was his; yet I never meant to make any bad ufe of my influence.
He was vastly fond of hearing himfelf talk; but being unluckily endowed with no great powers of eloquence,—he was obliged to Supply this deficiency by art ;—and Some trifling reading, joined to a tolerable memory, furniSued him with Scope for Superficial conversation ; which confisted mostly of quotations, and commonly— the fame over and over again. .
It was his greatest glory, that he w'anted nothing but a title (which he defigned to purchaSe, on his return to England) to render him a complete fine gentleman.
Such was Mr. Morton, from whom I daily received distinguished marks of favour and esteem; and as a Seafaring life was an entire novelty, I v/as not a little delighted with my voyage ; wshich was completed in the uSual time, of fair weather and favourable winds.
My patron finished his bufineSs in about turn months; and a few days before the time fixed on for our return to England, made me his confidant, in an affair, of which I had not before the least fufpiclon.
He
238 A MORAL NOVEL.
He informed me, that having danced, about a month before, with the daughter of an eminent planter, he had from that instant been defpe-rately in love with her; and had accordingly made propofals to her father, which he refufed, becaufe if Ihe married an’Englishman, he must, by that means, lofe the pleafure of her company ; which, from his age and infirmities, he stood not a little in need of, to Support his drooping Spirits; but however, that the young lady, not having the fame objeftions to visiting England, which influenced her father, had kindly agreed to elope with him, the night before his intended voyage; and he therefore begged my aflfistance towards the execution of his projefb.
I was not very fond of the affair, and attempted to remonstrate to him the dangers of a difcovery ; but he was too much in love, to listen to any thing, but what the violence of his paflion prompted: and feeing him thus firmly refolved upon it, gratitude would not Suffer me to withhold my aid.
Having therefore previousty prepared every thing neceffary for the appointed night, Mr. Morton, myfelf, and a Servant, repaired to the destined place ; where we waited a full hour beyond the time, whereat we expected the young lady to have appeared; and (considering
that
A MORAL NOVEL. 239 that lovers ever run before the clock) our furprize encreafed not a little.
At length my two amorous patron, beginning to grow very impatient, his beauteous dulcinea called to him from a window, and had only just time to inform us, that their fcheme was difco-vered by the treachery of a Servant: and therefore exhorted us to provide for our fafety. So faying she retired ; and we were about to do the fame, when, to our great mortification, we found ourSelves furrounded by fix men ; whofe number however did not difcourage us; and we, for fome lime, fought very obstinately, till Mr. Morton unluckily receiving a violent blow on the head from a cutlafs, the perfon who had struck him, feeing him fall, instantly took to his heels, as did all his companions, leaving me and the Servant who had accompanied us, to carry my unfortunate patron home, without any farther interruption.
But alas ! the mifchief he had received was irretrievable ; as the furgeon whom we Sent for to examine his wounds, ingenuoufly declared, that he could not live till morning ; and therefore advifed him to Settle his affairs; which having done, he called me to him, and defiring, that after his death, I would convey his will to England,—put a purfe into my hand, containing notes and cash to the value of five hundred pounds; after which he received the facrament:
and.
240 A M O R A L N O V E L.
and, as the Surgeon had foretold, at Six in the morning died, in the flower of his age.
A man whofe every word and adlion was di6tated by the paflion of vanity.
CHAP. XLIV.
■—•———— I See men’s judgments are A parcel of their fortunes, and things outward Do draw the inward quality after them To fuffer all alike.
Anthony and Cleopatra.
AS fortune now Seemed to Smile upon me,
I flattered myfelf with the pleasing proS-pedt of entering into Some way of busineSs on my arrival in England ; for which place (according to Mr. Morton’s last desire) I fet out in the first fhip that failed ; and as I had fome fellow-palTengers, who justly deferved the epithet of agreeable, the beautiful Serenity of the . weather, joined to my tranquillity of mind, rendered that by far the happiest period of my life : and elate with-joy, at the fuccefs of my expedition ; we judged ourfelves to be within about six days fail of the Britifh channel, when we discovered two large fhips to the leeward, which proved to be Algerine men of war: whereupon
we
A MORAL NOVEL. 241 we immediately crowded all the fall we could, but to no purpofe, the Turks came up with us the next day; and as it was in vain for a merchantman to oppofe two fuch large (hips; they boarded our vessel, and having made the whole crew prisoners, loaded us with irons, and con-dudted us captives into Algiers, the place of their destination.
As Soon as we landed, we were carried to the Bafhaw’s palace, who claims every tenth man, as hb fbare of the staves ; and as I did not happen to fall to his lot, I was carried with the rest of my countrymen, into the public marketplace ; where, as there were but twenty of us, a Targereen (a title of refpedl given to the better fort of inhabitants at Algiers) came to bargain for us all ; but feeing me of a puny make, and not robust enough for his work, he refufed to have me; and I was afterwards fold at a low price, to a perfon who rather looked like an overfeer for Some body elfe, than one who had bought me for himfelf: nor was I mistaken in my conjeftures, he carried me to my owner, who was a w^oman of Seemingly about fifty years of age, and of a very forbidding
afpedf.-----1 was now^ put to my w^ork, which
was to cultivate a fmall piece of ground, that Supplied all necessaries for the family ; which indeed was not large, as it conststed only of my mistrefs, a negro maid-Servant, and myfelf.
Vol; II.	L	Thus
242 A MORAL NOVEL.
Thus Situated, I had formed a much worfc opinion of stavery, than it deferved ; or perhaps I was more lucky, in getting into this family, than many others, v/ho had met with the fame
misfortune;----indeed, 1 could not accufe my
mistrefs of the least Severity,-stie frequently
eyed me when at work, with the greatest attention, and, as I fancied, took a peculiar pleasure in thus looking at me.^’
1 had not been there long, before by the following accident, I stifcovered that She was not a native of Algiers: while I was one day at work, in order to amufe myfelf, I began Singing a French fong, which chancing to overhear, in an affable obhging manner, ste afked me if 1 understood.French, and on my anfwering in the affirmative, began a conversation with me in that language, wherein stie alked me Several questions relative to my country, family, and fo forth, and from that naivete in her expressions, which no strangers can ever attain ; I w’as convinced, that She could have been born in ho other country.
A fhort time after this, fhe removed me from the garden to the hcufe, where I Served her in quality of footmm, and had now much le(s reafon to complain of my lot, than before,—and without any profpedl or cxpedfations in the world,-— had not the mere word of stavery diSgusted me, I ihould not have been at all anxious about
changing
A MORAL NOVEL. 243 changing my situation ; but as every Englilhman has an instinctive veneration and desire for liberty, So 1 was determined to endeavour to procure mine, for which I had like to have fuffered most Severely.
As my mistrefs treated me rather with the familiarity of a friend, than the austerity of a Superior, I was not (like other staves) under the least restri<9;ion or confinement; wherefore rising one morning before the rest of the family, I hurried down to the fea-side, hoping there to find fome vessel, wherein to make my efcape ; but my eagernefs leading me beyond the limits allotted to thofe in bondage, I was discovered by a Spy, whofe buSinefs it was to watch the conduct of the staves, and carried before the viceroy, who Sentenced me to the battoon, for you must obferve, that tho’ individuals may treat their staves with what lenity they pleafe; nevertheless there are fome general rules, which we were all obliged to conform to ; but to proceed, the battoon is a punissiment inflicted by a strong staff about six feet long, in the middle whereof, are bored two holes, through which a cord is put and fastened on the other side, by large knots; by this means, the cord forms a loop, and both the feet of the offender being put therein, two men, one at each end of the stick, lifting it up In their arms, twist it, till they are fast pinched by the cord, and raising them, the L 2	foies
244 A MORAL NOVEL, foies upwards, the Sufferer’s head hanging upofx the ground in this posture, he receives as many strokes thereon, as the council fhall appoint; I was Sentenced to have two hundred, but mv mistreSs’s mediation, Saved me from the torture ; with whom I every day became a greater favourite, and as she had long laid aSide all that baughtineSs and reServe, with w'hich the people at Algiers, generally treat their staves ; I began to think, that she entertained thoughts of me, not much to her honour, and as the Sequel will shew, I was not totally mistaken in my Suspicions, though she had other motives for her behaviour, than what I at first imagined.
CHAP.
A M O R A L N O V E L. 245 CHAP. XLV.
Whilst the Smooth stream of pleafure glides. Whilst life rolls on in rapid tides;
Hope gilds each rising morn.
Whilst every 7,ephyr, breathes perfumes,
Whilst every path, with rofes blooms;
We fear no latent thorn.
Exemplary Mother.
Madam la Bijoux (So was my mistreSs call’d) frequently at my leifure hours, employed me in reading Some French author to her, and I had lived in this situation about four months, when being one day thus busied, she not a little Surprized me, by the following diS-courfe.—‘‘ After my behaviour, (Said she) Mr. “ Hartry, (for I had informed her of my name) —it would be ridiculous in me, to pretend to difguife my Sentiments any longer ;—I do not “ mean it,—nor am I ashamed of them,—yes “ Sir,—I will freely confefs my love for you.” Love for me, Madam?” (interrupted!)— Yes,, Sir, (continued she) for you ;—but hear “ what I have to fay,—before you attempt to “ reply :—I have Said, that I love you, and as a “ proof thereof, will now place Some confidence “ in you :—I am a French widow, and posteffed ‘‘ of a fortune large enough to render two people of moderate desires, completely happy. It is L 3	“ not
24si A M O R A L N O V E L.
“ not (as you may imagine) from inclination, that I make this the place of my reSidence; the reafon is as follows.
“ About four years ago, (which was a twelve-month after my late hulband’s death)—a gen-tieman, one day in private, attempted to take “ Some liberties which were not conSistent with “ his honour, or my virtue ; when in the height of my refentmentj I Snatched his own fword “ that hung near me, and, without giving my-“ Self time to confider the confequences, un-happily stabbed him.—■
“ It w'as impossible for Such an affair, to re-“ main long Secret ;--and as I knew justice must inevitably take her courfe, I had no other way “ of Saving myfclf, but by flight-therefore packing up what money and jewels I had by me, I efcaped to this place; where I have « lived ever fince, though it is far from ray iii-“ tention, to end my days here.—
I have lately heard, that the profecution ** against me is now dropped, which enables me “ to return to Paris with Safety,—I Shall in a Few days fet out for that place, and having “ expreffed my regard for you; shall now con-vince you of it, by other w^ays than words, and here make you an offer of my hand and fortune.”
It
A M O R A L N O V E L. 247
It is impofllble for me to give you a just idea ef my astonishment at hearing her talk thus, nor was my terror much inferior to my furprize ; for however ardent my desire might be to regain my liberty, I could not think of purchasing it at Such a price; though at the fame time, as I knew her to be a woman of violent pastions, I did not know how much a refufal might v/ound her pride, nor to what lengths it might carry her ; for which reafons, I determined to a6b with the greatest caution, least by exciting her refentment against me, she should be drove to any extremities, nor can I anfwer how far this apprehension would have operated on me, had it not been fuppreffed by the reeol!eO;ion of poor Charlotte, for whom my affe^ion was still most lively, however, my manner of leaving her, might indicate otherwife.
As abfcnce had only ferved to Increafe my love, this joined to the improbability of Madam, la Bijoux’s story, (wshich I did not entirely credit) made me hesitate a great while, before I attempted to make any anfwer to her propofal, which she perceiving, left the room, faying she should return in an hour for my anfwer, according to which, 1 might expedl her favour, or renounce ail pretensions thereto.—
Confcious that It would be to no purpofe to argue upon mutual affection with a woman of L 4	her
248 A MORAL NOVEL.
her violent passions, as my only refource, I determined to adopt a fraud, which under Such circumstances, I thought excufable; and therefore on her return, thanked her in the politest terms that I was master of, for the honour Ihe intended me ; but added, that it was impossible for me to accept of it, as my hand was already unluckily difpofed of in England, and affured her, that I fhould always conSider her regard, as the greatest honour which could be conferred on me.
Then concluded, by lamenting the perverfe-nefs of my fate, in thus putting it out of my power to accept her offer : while I was thus informing her of my refolution, I obferved, that Ihe eyed me with great attention, and as I knew I was uttering a fallhood, I believe I Spoke with a very bad grace.—
Having waited Some time in expeftation of her anfwer, she at last cried in a prefumptuous toneVery well. Sir,—this is a good— a very plausible excufe, and had you thought of “ it Sooner, I might have been made a dupe to your mean Subterfuge,—but I can now fee “ through So poor,—fo shallow an artifice;— “ i fee that I am difagreeable to you,—but since you have had the audacity to provoke my << refentment; - — beware the confequences,— « dread the anger ef a flighted woman ;—good
“ heaven!
A MORAL NOVEL. 249
“ heaven I—that I should ever Subje6l my Self to “ a refufal from my own stave.”
Hereupon I attempted Several times to appeafe her rage, but in vain, she was fo hurried away by her paffion, when once her pride was alarmed, that she would hear nothing, and left me in no very enviable situation, as I knew I had every thing to fear from the violence of her temper.
■	. t -
, - r" 'i :	‘	‘ i, ■
■ VV-!; ‘ T I i ■ i! . j .	■
'	'	L5	CHAL
\
250 AMORAL NOVEL. CHAP. XL VI.
Hope Springs eternal in the human breast,
Man never is but always to be blest.
Pot e’s E s b a y on Man.
IT has been often remark’d that there are no lestgths to ’(vhieh'the anger of an offended woman, will not carry her, when like the troubled Sea, and raging wind, contending in a fit of lawlefs ire, which is the mightier ;—both wild and ungovernable, they Suffer themfelves to be hurried away by the rapid stream of pastion, and will not Suffer the noble pilot of our a£tions,«—rea-fon, to have the fmallest power.
We indeed dally fee instances hereof, though at the fame time, we cannot be blind to the many acceptions which may be made to it; for Some women there are, whom nature has fafhioned in So meek and mild a mould, that they will rather fubjedl themfelves to a Second injury, than attempt to revenge the first.—
Thefe, ye youths, are jewels worthy of your preservation ; and when in a female you find goodnefs and beauty join’d, regard her as the immediate welfare of your fouls.
, . '	^ I	Such
A MORAL NOVEL. 251
Such were the refle<51ions Madam la Bijoux’s Behaviour occafioned, and in which I was bussed, when I was interrupted by the maid-fervant, whom I before mentioned, and who came to inform me (instigated, as she faid, by her regard) of Something that nearly concerned my Safety; videlicet} that she had over-heard her mistrefs tampering with two negroes to murder me, in the evening, on my road to a place, where she had promised to fend me.
I ssncerely thanked the honest girl for her in^ telligence ; and as the only method to efcape the intended blow, hastened to la Bijoux, of whom having, on my knees, begg’d pardon for my behaviour, 1 assigned the following reafon as the caufe. That I imagined, she had only made So kind an offer, to fee how. far my prefumption would carry me ; but that having now found my •error, I was willing to accept of her generous -propofal, and should think myfelf ever happy in the union : I believe she fufpefited my being acquainted with her intention, by the hesstation she made ; but as her passion was now fubssded, and having (as you will preSently hear) very good xeafons for her clemency, she was not long in refolving -what courfe to take; and in a few days we fet fail for France : on cur arrival there we were immediately married^ and then proceeded to Pans.--
Judge,
252 A MORAL NOVEL.
Judge, if you possibly can, what was my fur-prize, to find myfelf, before I had been twenty hours in the place, arrested at different Suits, for upwards of five thoufand pounds; being debts my wife had contradied Some time before.—In the most violent agitation of mind, I was hurried to prifon, and now began to fee the infamous traitrefs in her true colours ; efpecially as I was in a Short time informed by the master of the hotel, where J had stopped on my arrival, that ihe had left hishoufe immediately after my Seizure, without communicating to any one v/hat were her intensions.
This affair (as you may fuppofe) made a great noile in the town, the major part of which was Soon convinced of my innocence ; and as Some of the principal inhabitants were kind enough to interest themfelves in my behalf: I was Soon releafed, and found myfelf in possession of five hundred pounds, which the Due de Choifeul had, on hearing my story, been generous enough to colleQ; for me.
As Soon as I was at liberty, my first buSinefs was to enquire after my wife ; nor was it long before I had the mortification of hearing, that. She was very well known at Paris, having long exerciSed a Scandalous profession in that place ; during which time stie had contracted thefe debts, which not being able to pay. She had cheated her creditors, by efcaping to Algiers.
You
A MORAL NOVEL. 253 You may judge of the Situation of my mind, en conlidering of my near alliance to Such a woman ; and Surely I shall not be thought destitute either of tenderneSs or Christianity, for faying, that my grief was alleviated, by hearing in a few days, that she was found drowned in a pond, near the Suburbs ; occasioned (as I fuppofe) by her apprehensions of being brought to publick justice.
As a Christian, I sincerely lamented her unhappy fate, though without any of the tender Solicitudes of a hushand.
Finding myfelf now in postestlon of five hundred pounds, and Surely I may fay, of Some little experience, having been, in one week, a bat-chelor, hushand, and a widower ;' I bought a share in the shop where I first met you, and the other proprietor dying Soon after, the whole bu-sinefs (which was pretty considerable) devolv’d upon me : and in this situation I might have enjoy’d an uninterrupted felicity, had it not been destroyed by the continual expectation of happier days. And give me leave to obferve, that the contentment of three fourths of mankind is hinder’d by the fame method. Men lofe their present pleafure, by looking for what is to come: and though many people are thoroughly con-winced of this ; nevertheless there is fuch a powerful charm in hope, that we cannot help cherishing
254 A MORAL NOVEL, rifhing it, and thus—fooliifhly Sacrifice all our prefent felicity, .to the emptinefs of vain expectations.
But I beg your pardon (faid Sir Charles) I am troubling you with reflefilions, occasioned by my own adventures; which can be no amufement or information to you, as they only tend to Ihew, that, notwithstanding all make happinefs the wish’d for goal, we never find one who arrives at his destin’d point.
CHAP.
A MORAL NOVEL. 255
CHAP. XLVII.
■ill.. n»You have many goodly days to fee.
The liquid drops of tears, that you have ssied Shall come again, transform’d to orient pearl. Advantaging their loan with Interest,
Of ten times double gain of happinefs.
K. Richard III.
IN this manner did cur friends amufe them-Selves during their journey ; and Sir Charles, notwithstanding what he faid, could not help enjoying the future in the prefent: he was innately happy, to think the time was near, when he was to be restored to the arms of his fond, expefting parent, and to meet all his foul held (dearin the.perfon of his Charlotte.
In the mean lime, poor Melvill was distradled by the painful, fuSpended alternative of doubt jandfear, weavering in hislbreast.
He could not bear the thoughts of feeing that 'woman the wife of ^another, wbdfe felicity he hoped to have been the chief instrument of: and thus was the unhappy Maria uonderaned as guiL ty, by a man on whom she doated with the most extravagant fondnefs.
Gut
256 A MORAL NOVEL.
Our travellers at length landed at Dover, in the dulk of the evening, and were proceeding to the town, when their assistance was called for, by a young man, whom two others were forcing into a boat, against his inclination; and who, having made all the refistance in his power, was nearly yielding to Superior strength, when our two friends appeared in view, whofe aid he beggM with great earnestnefs: v/hich as they never refus’d to innocence oppressed, they Soon made the two ruffians quit their hold, and con-dudled the perfon they had refcued to an inn in the town ; where as Soon as lights were brought, fixing his eyes stedfastly on Melvill, he had only the ^ower to cry. Good God!—and fainted away.
Our travellers had obferved the emotions in his face, and were ready to catch him as he fell; and having, by the help of drops, &c. brought him to himfelf ; the colour no Sooner began to come into his cheeks,—than Melvill, with the like exclamation, fainted away likewife.—
Sir Charles stood between them both, in the greatest perplexity, not knowing what to imagine from fo extraordinary an accident however, he did not remain long in this uncertainty ; for when Melvill came to himfelf—starting up, he cried, — “ It is— it is Mariaand was running to catch the stranger in his arms,—when woe-fraught recolledlion, stinging him like an
adder.
A M O R A L N O V E L. 257
adder,—he retreated, and fixing his eyes in frightful ssillnefs,—exclaimed,-Yes, you are indeed Maria	“ —-what ?—not Maria
“ Hartry,—no, odious, detested Clunch.
So faying, he fell back in strong convulfions, into the arms of his friend ; who now began to fee a little more clearly into this mysterious affair. —....— Maria (for it was really her) stood trembling, and ready to assert her innocence ;. «
and forgetful of Melvill’s prefent infenfibility, in a feeble voice interrupted with tears, cried,— No,—-poor mistaken Melvill I am not the abject thing you think me but I cannot blame you, appearances were strong against “ me yet I am still Maria the fame fond maid you left me, and in that thought my hap-** pinefs is complete.”———Then catching her brother (though unknown to be fuch) by the “ hand, added, in a most moving accent,—“ Oh, Sir,—did you but know my history,—I am Sure you would drop a tender tear, in pity of my woes-but do, dear Sir, perfuade him of my
“ innocence ;•---— for innocent I am,—you
“ may believe me.”
“ I do (replied Sir Charles)—I will believe << you, what I know you are,— a miferable, guiltlefs maid,—know your history, and know you both unfortunate but better times will come, and Soon :--for still he loves, “ and oft to me has Spoke of you, in passionate and tender terms,”
Melvill
258 A MORAL NOVEL.
Melvill being now Somewhat compos’d, our heroine difclos’d to him every circumstance, which the reader has before heard ; though it was not till after a long while, that he could be perfuaded of the truth of what he heard.
When he began to talk and think a little more collediedly, and was convinced of the reality of his blifs,—he caught the now happy Maria in his arms, and a most tender and affecisting Scene enfued,---too tender, too astedling for my poor pen, even to attempt a defcription of.
When they had indulged their mingled transports of grief. Surprize, and joy, for Some time, and an interval of moderation gave them leave to think of Something elfe hefiJes their love; new wonders waited lor them all to hear and fee. —Maria to find a friend, and long lost brother, for whom stie had often figh’d in vain ; but by whoSe prefence all her past cares were far overbalanced ;---and with whom she at once congratulated, and condoled congratulated, on his acceffibn to a title and fortune -condol’d w th him, for the lofs of a tender and affedtionate father.—----Thefe indeed appeared almost as mi-
racles to both our heroes ; yet notwithstanding, the meafure of their joy .was now completely full, Sir Charles could not refrain from dropping a tear, as a tribute due to the memory of his fa-ter : nor did Melvill forget to Sympathize with two Such friends for their lofs. When their mutual
AMORAL NOVEL. 259 tual amazement was in Some degree fubSided, Melvill tenderly enquired of his Maria, by what strange accident, fhe had tome into the Situation, from which they had fo happily delivered her.
“ By the villanous artifices of a man (Said Ihe) “ from whole Snares, I hope, I shall now be “ entirely free,”—She then related to them circumstantially, what the reader has before heard concerning lord Dapperwit; and—proceeded as follows.—“ We were no Sooner fettled in Lon-“ don, happy in the thought of my having fo ‘‘ v/ell efcap’d him, than he came there likewife ;
and finding out where we lived, by the trea-** chery of a Servant, got introduc’d one evening, “ while the family were all at the play ; and again carried me away by force.-—That I might be the lefs likely to be refcu’d, he brought me “ thefe cloaths, in which he ordered me to drefs myfelf;—I dar’d not but to obey, and thus « equipp’d, he hurried me down to this place, intending I fuppofe, to carry me abroad, had “ not Providence thus mercifully Sent you to my assistance.”
Thus \vere thefe Seeming difficulties all cleared up ; and they Spent fo much time in mutual congratulations, that it was very late before they parted. The next morning Maria having pur-chafed Some cloaths of the landlord’s daughter.
Set
26o a moral novel.
fet out for London, with our two heroes ; at which place they arrived that evening.
Imagining a Surprize of So tender a nature, might be too much for lady Hartry’s Spirits, it was judg’d proper that Maria Should go home alone, and having broke the affair to her mother, fhould fend for the gentlemen, which fhe accordingly did ; and notwithssanclirg this lady was pre-acquaimed with her approaching happinefs: —all the Spontaneous feelings of maternal ten-dernefs, rufh’d into her heart, and render’d the joy almost too great to bear with moderation.
Another Scene nov/ past’d like that at Dover, —Charlotte fainted through exceSs of blist at Seeing Sir Charles, and Mr. Howard no longer with-held his confept from making this worthy pair happy.
Fro.m what has been Said, the readers will naturally expedt two marriages; —nor will they be difappointed.
In about a fortnight, Sir Charles led his Charlotte, and Melvill his Maria to the altar, and the fame day Saw thefe two happy couple, united by indissoluble ties..
Sure never viere found a happier Set of people I if our heroines were handfome, when their husbands first knew them, they were now more ex-
quifitely
A MORAL NOVEL. 261 quiSiteiy fo, as time had brought to perSeQion thofe beauties, which were then but in the blossom.
Having thus dispos’d of my principal perfon-ages, I muss (after the example of my betters) likewise give Some Small account - of the other charafters mentioned in this trifling work.
Don Carlos, married an agreeable lady in his own country, with whom he finds all the hap-pinefs that So worthy a man deServes, and ssill corresponds with Melvill as a friend.
When rt\y lord Dapperwit was convinc’d that he muss give up all Sarther thoughts of Maria, he hassened over to Ireland, to avoid being called to an account at the Old Bailey for his behaviour; however, he received the juss punifhment oS his wickedneSs there, Sor continuing his old trick, of doing what he had a mind to ; he was run through the body for his impertinence, by a hotheaded Wess-Indian.
When Sir Charles Hartry (according to pro-mife,) call’d upon MiSs Barton, he was agreeably Surpriz’d at finding her in posteflion of an ample fortune, as being heir at law, to her infamous fisser, who was jussly kill’d by a fall from her horSe, and died without a will.
Mellifont
262 A M O R A L N O V E L.
Mellifont with his thouSand pounds, went down to Southampton, hoping that by the eclat, he was thereby enabled to make ; he Should pick up Some girl of fortune, and thought he had Succeeded even beyond his most Sanguine expectations ; but unluckily, the biter was bit:—his wife proving to be a milliner, who was there on the fame Scheme with himfelf; they now therefore mutually endeavour to plague each other, in which they Succeed pretty well, having very little to live on, and even that little, earned by the most Servile means.
The grief which Mrs. Modish felt for the lofs of her truly amiable i^imily, join’d to the still Severer affliction, that she underwent, to find how stightly grounded Mr. Martin’s affeCtion had been for her, gave rife to a diforder that too quickly put an end to her days.
Sir Henry Summers is still poffefied of that charitable benevolence of difpofition, which forms fo confpicuous a part of his character, though Mrs. Martin’s death has occafioned in him, a thoughtlefs inattention, which no time can ever efface.
Melvill Soon after his marriage, bought an estate near Mr. Howard’s wherein Maria, himfelf, and lady Hartry live.	'
Sir
A MORAL NOVEL. ^63
Sir Charles and Charlotte, live with Mr. Howard, and thus do thefe two families, happy in themfelves, find faithful friends, and agreeable neighbours in each other, being happy examples ; that they will best Succeed, who still confide in virtuous inclinations: they each couple,. are blest with one tender pledge of mutual love ; and to fee the joy they have in them, is inexprestible ;—at least for me ; I must therefore in the words of an ingenious writer, fay ;
I.	Who
2si4 A MORAL NOVEL.
. !.
Who can defcribe a joy like this,
The filial Smile, the parent’s kifs,
The tendernefs innate.
Pathetic cares, that Sooth, that melt,
'The thrilling heart, unknown, unfelt,
But in the nuptial state.
II.
Hail virtuous state, coelestial plan.
Heaven’s first, kind institute to man, Infcrib’st on Sacred rolls;
The mystic knot, death only parts. Endearing tye, union of hearts,
And partneistiip of fouls,
III.
Hail wedded love, nor longer fear The courtier’s raillery, the Sneer Of rakes, or buffoon’s jest.
Manners like garments, have their run, When delicacy mounts the throne.
Wit can’t be loofely drest.
FINIS.
*	.O'	-
P - ' ' ■" • •
o',	.	^
-f	•	'	'	'	■	'
^ V '	^	t	'
. . si ^ /
A
'	* '	.	^	-ii
; . ' ' ' ' ' ■ • ■ '
' S	.	•	' , ^	'
.	^ I ... ■-.	■	:	■ . j
^	. ■ L	'	,	, t i ■	. .	....^
•	'	-	\	•■	■	'''''i	■	'	-..:
^	•■ •• c
■( . ■ ' ' - ■ ' C	N
•I	.
.	i- ■	'	i
' i* " ■ ■	'	' '	•' '■
'	•	/.	'	.	i
A. ■■■•'‘.	'V	,
V . ’	■ "V'i 'KAK '	. ‘ -i'	.
:/'i,ArifA:-VV'• ' riri'ri' '■■
?	'	• s	,
N-' '	• ■ ■	^	. V •
L'*'. • • : '■ ' '
' E- -	' .	.	•
■'Ct,	■	'	‘
~ L ' ■ '	^	■	'	'h'	,	■ ' '	* C	-	-
■.V	.	-	/	■ . ■ .
.	;	'■■..	*	y .	.
^ ■■■ ^
. ^	. C'=-	• . .	.	'	A ■ -
A . /' ■ : ^ - -• ^
he*. •■	•	’*^. • ■	' •• '
i.', i
mV"- ■ > ■
■ OttI ■
- nfj
lUi
'• >y, •
A	.
% ■ ■ ' -/ , •
_	-	.	^ fiTr
SlTiG'ZXi -	AL.U COLLECTION > *■
—.............
r	'	'
r	■ ■
\ .
- ■	-	i
*■ ' ' '' •...'.
\	, i T/-	•■'-
I	.	*	'
‘	Jt'jir tn rs tJ
I	'■'■'’^;'4t''4<.’■' •	' '*	’■S'p|S^‘
if,':-'' ''''''li^flNNC \ : ':-%i
■ .fr^......^	s,;,., l'.N
!!''’ , -■■%,- ‘	■ '	,■■■■,'.■' .■#- ' 'i
■'''’'' A*-A
"	■	\ v'
•n-	■■'	.	, ■	-	' ’seC
': ' - ^ A"S
1' '' -■ • ' ' '■
' . ,te ■	:
■	.—LCi:>/' L•'hir^ ' 'k viiii«kLt'' .'N..,^	.
■■■- ' Aid. 1
[io5^L|
- ' iiNoy|Ll|
I;	,.j,
' Lf XmC
S-s. 1
!■;	' Sf-T ■■	'i.:
xjCcri
.|.. • ^
I.	Diril.
II.	ji, ‘Tj
I A VI
i T Lf ■'
^r^C'cniipk>v m ■
_ i'j|'i '
■Id X
• I i '•^ii i* i