
''i
-*?*^ ' . ^
,. ■ i
■.rf ,;:
-	■	■ :4 I
. ■■ ■■■-•• ■ . ■ ■ '■ ■ ■;■' : ■■	'	''■■	.	■•	''-A'
/ "r
' ■ '	' '"'■i f'V-'i 'S'-
' '	' AtteAV ~ CS57 '	-
' ■	'	v.i '"'-’slti
®,'S
THE
GODFREY F. SINGER MEMORIAL PRESENTED BY
MR. AND MRS. JACOB SINGER
\
*■.,	-■ ■■■,' ■-	. ■ c :	'	■ -	' ■ ■
V	■ h. ' ' r-. ■	*	^	'
' r'"	■■	- • '	'	", ’A	T
'■■N ■•	-*■	.
■'■•.■ ' ^ ' • , - ' 0: ’
*. •,	' /■	S '	■'	-•--•Cl-.-. A"' ’
■ - I_ - , _.	_	.	- -	. . , f	_r	,
-L-'h;	_	■	-	-.D -	• h •"
;'A	^	cv •	• '•	..	.	•	U
. -A	L
LESSON FOR LOVERS.
OR THE
HISTORY
OF
COLONEL MELVILLE,
AND
LADY CHARLOTTE RICHLEY.
\
VOLUME I.
---1.. . -----
LONDON:
PRINTED FOR FRANCIS NOBLE, AT HIS. CIRCULAT-ING LIBRARY, OPPOSITE GRAYS-INN'GATE, HOL-BORN. MjDCCjLXXXlII.
■	^	-	'	"' -	'*■	' '". 't •■ -	;.■,'	:	._•'"
'	' ■”■■: . rv";-. y >■ :'.'■ .'■ .' .	' \
• ■	' ■■' '* '■^ •;:') ■'" ‘t .	'
■ /	,‘C 'A, ' i :	^	r; ^
'•	',	!’•'•..■ .A ,'J Ax
'	'Vi' ”■ '	■'
■■•, . tei' V.-r' .	"'v- C ■ ■ ‘C'':;:	'
• V ’ ^ -N	■ V c	■	■■'	-' .V;N..,' ■: ■■
■	;" ■■■	'; L- ■'i'S;':'':- '5--
Sv ‘	.	"	■■■	^ V	- _ . ■	■
W-	^	■C-'C	.
^ •	'■■	■	■ ■ . ■ — .	; CS ^ ^ "■■■ '
f - ■	vDsaV
:.'tec-	:c.c y;/v,;c''-C’
A i':-L'' ■ .	,■ ' .	'	- ■ ■ ■’
i.:,. •	', -,'■	,	■	-
Ti . '■	■	'	. V- : CcN' ■•	'■
"" '	. . ■ ■	■ . ’ . ‘	;' N C ■	■	■ ^
y: ,■ . '	,• ■■.	v	'	■ ' '
:,;y	y.-;: ;	^	' V-' ’	-	' ' ' ,
■' ri, . ^	' ■ 'V''>-' 'T- " :	L'L;' ' ,	,	'
mmrr-.-:' ■ r ■ --■ *,:■ . ■ ; ■ -. . '
M Ui 00 J
PREFACE.
The writer of the following work hopes an attempt to furnifh an hour of innocent amuSement to the virtuous I mind, or to draw forth the tribute or a pitying tear for Suffering merit (in an I age where So many precious moments are fool’d, frolick’d, or loung’d away) ^ may at least meet with fome degree of a V approbation, if not with applauSe.
It is humbly preSumed this Species of writing, whilst it renders vicious L. characters the objects of detestation, and whilst it warms the SuSceptible heart to feel for distreffed worth, will ite. not be judged uSelefs, nor wholly deSti-1^ tute of instruction.
'The moral of the following-but
vfF the author will not anticipatenor fay jk more on this head, left he should be like l^that writer who exiiausted his whole Sub-
1"^	jeft
iv	PREFACE.
ject in a very long preface, and had nothing new to fay in his book.
For the errors in this work, the writer begs leave to recommend to the critic the following lines of our admirable poet Mr. Pope :
“ Whoever thinks a fanltlefs piece to fee,
Thinks what ne’er was, nor is, noS e’er (hall be :
“ In ev’ry work regard the writer’s end.
Since none can compafs more than they intends Survey the whole, nor Seek flight faults to find,
“ Where nature moves, and rapture warms the mind.
“ i^nd if the means be juft, the conduct true,
“ Applaufe, in Spite of trivial faults, is due.”
ESSAY ON CRITICISM^
, ,v.~~	~ ~ . .. ' , '--—-------rrs*
ERRATA. voLn i.
Page. Line.
1 57	2 /««r fair, read fine.
6o 8 for lovers., read admirers. ,	.
i6 Dr Mrs. rcfid a Mrs.
66	14 for univerfal, read univerfally. .
h7 23 for Sure, read pure.
107	10 for 02l, read of a.	:
22 Dr intentions, rerzi intention.
133	10 Dr notions, rend nations,
A
A
1
I L E S S O N
i.
FOR
LOVERS.
i
;	LETTER!.
COLONEL MELVILLE, TO SIR HENRY BELLMOUR.
.	' Wu'Jdcy-Park, June 2d^
\ i ES, my friend, I allow, with you, that Lady Charlotte Richley is lovely in her perSon—highly accom-' plistied—her manners gentle— her heart good—and her underfianding finely ■ cultivated—and yet—aStoniShing as it may Seem to you—I fee this very amiable, this fine young creature every day, and indeed all the day (for the good old Earl is perpetually leaving ns together) with just the Same indif-voL. I.	A • ■ ference
2	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
ference I Should my great-grandmother. —I hear her Sing the most impaShoned notes, without feeling one of thofe thrilling tremors of which you often prate So much about;—and I lead her 'willing hand up the dance with not a jot more pleafure or emotion than I should that of a Sister. Her eyes, her i fine complexion, and the Symmetry of her . features touch me no more than if I wax contemplating the picture-gallery in Hampton Court.—No, Harry— thy friend is not formed for the fofz w . pashon of love.
“ I have in tents, and fighting fields been bred,
“ Unknowing the Seducing charms of woman.”
I expect daily to receive orders when I am to embark for America, and most heartily wish to be again Serving my King and country.—I am Sick—fick to death, of this idle, this loitering life in thefe Soft Scenes.
“ A dreadful punishment,” you cry, “ Surely, to be the favourite compa-
‘‘ nion
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	3
“ iiion of that worthiest of men, Earl “ Richley, and his charming daughter; “ and to have this calamity happen in ‘‘ one of the most beautiful Situations “ in England, is still more lamentable.” Your raillery, my fnend, is just;—I have nothing to blame but my own callous heart. It is true, I feel the most exquisite gratitude for my ever revered friend, the excellent father, and all the tender eSieem of a brothePs affection for his lovely daughter, but nothing more, I certainly am, at this moitient, in the most odd predicament in the world—the most unaccountably circumstanced :— trying (Sliall I call it .^) to raife in my heart a passion for this very amiable woman, as a return for the unbounded care and tendernefs of her admirable parent, from my almost helplefs infancy (when my noble father, General Melville, died So gloisioussy in battle) even to this prefent moment.-—^Heavens! with what aim oft parental affection did this best K z	i	of
4	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
of men cauSe nie to be educated in the Strictest line of moral virtue!—How excellent the preceptors with which he furnished my inexperienced youth !— with what unremitting ashduity ! with what care and fidelity has he managed ; and improved the fortune my father bequeathed me ! how strenuously and Successfully has this noble friend procured me that high command in the military line I now enjoy! You remember the affecting circumstance— you Still recollect, my Henry, what I have So often recounted to you, the little history of my infant years—you cannot forget that my gallant father expired in the arms of my revered benefactor ;—-and with his dying breath, in faltering accents, could only pronounce,—‘‘ My poor Charles!—my boy !—be his”—-friend—he would have Said ; but, in that dreadful moment, his Speech forSook him. Lord Rich-ley, straining him to his heart, could
only
')	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	5
^ only fay—“ I will be his guide'—his guardian—’his father V
Ah, Bellmour! not a doubt wsith me remains, but that the good man intends as fully to make the latter title as certain as he has done the former:— his whole prefent behaviour plainly denotes his intention.
“ My Charles,” he is continually calling me “ what is your opinion of this or that improvement in the park or gardens ?—^What, my chilchAnf \vith an intelligent glance at his fair daughter and your favoured Charles, “ what are your opinions of theSe alterations
Is not this Speaking pretty plainly ?
—A thouSand circumflances, too, occur to my thoughts, even from my -	'
childish days, to corroborate this idea.
When I constantly Spent my annual rccefsfrom School, at Richley-Park, how	'
perpetually did my noble guardian pro-pofe little parties of pleafure,' in which A 3	I, by
- 6	A LKSSON FOR LOVERS. '
T,by his generous permifilon (unSought) was always Lady Charlotte’s partner in the dance—her attendant in the chace —and her fellow-student in history, geography, and the more Sliowy accomplishments.—How often has this worthy nobleman fimcied the Song of his darling daughter (he never had another child) was incomplete, except accompanied by ?ny flute—or that her harp-fichoivl performances still wanted the addition of my violin.—In short, my friend, it Seems as if we had been educated for each other.—Poshbly this very Suggestion of mine (for Such is tlie strange unaccountable caprice of man) may be the only reaSon that I have none of thoSe uneafy hours— thofe anxious moments of SuSpenfe that your dying, doating lovers have. I love difficulties—I am fond of arduous undertakings—but here the path Seems fo er'.fy—-that there are no pains required' to even attempt the conqueSt—the
prize
i
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	7
prize Seems already mine.'—You will not, my Bellmour, SuSpect me, I trust, of vanity., if I Say I have abundant rea-Son to believe I am far—-very far, from being indifferent to Lady* Charlotte : indeed, to confefs the Secret truth (in the utmoSt confidence) I have long thought So.-----A> particular circum-
stance, a few^ stays fince (not to mention others) has confirmed me in this opinion. Above a year ago I prefent-ed her with a beautiful goldfinch, of which She has been remarkably fond: Jshe constantly fed it wsith her own hand;
she drest its cage with flowers;—and it stood in the window of her own apartment.—By Some accident this little favourite was lately found one.morning stretched at its length,—^cold and dead. —Lady Charlotte even flirieked when she beheld this fight. The Earl and I, who were walking in the gallery, near her dreshng-room, haStened to fee what could poflibly be the matter-—when A 4	we
1
$	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
we found her weeping over this beau- ■ tiful bird, and vainly endeavouring to ' warm it, by her kiffes, into life.
“ Pho, child!” Said my good old friend, “ is this all ? I feared you was taken Suddenly ill.—Another goldfinch may Soon, Surely, be procured.”
“ Yes, Sir,” She returned Stgliing emphatically, “ another may—but I never—never can love another like this /
—this, was a mo(I particular favourite.
—O my poor bird 1 I would give every iewel I have to purchaSe thy precious life.”-—And again flie prefied it to her lips.
Why, child, is not one goldfinch as good as another?” Said the Earl.
“ Ah, no ! my Lorci,” rejoined Slie, Sighinp-,—and that instant cast a look
O O'
of inexpreffible tenderneSs on your friend.
I retired Soon after to my apartment;
—I examined again and again the above little incident;—but still, stiali I fay, it
had
f	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	I 7
I owm fake, as that of her excellent* fa-f ther, who, good man (as your gallant parent was his most beloved friend) naturally transferred all that affection ; to the fan he felt for the father; and how could he shew it better, than by one day uniting your hand to that of his darling only child ? To which let me add (moral and good as his own conduct is) the very excellent charac-ter you poffefs (a rare thing- in this dissipated age) is no fmall inducement to him.
That this amiable Lady Charlotte would make an excellent wife, I have not a single doubt: but the misfortune is, though handfome, young, ac-' complished, rich. Sec. she still wants in toPF eye that tmaccoimtahle fomething, that can only be felt^ but never de~ fdnbed.—'I'he old faying, that marry frjl,, and love will come after., is Surely of all others the most falfe., ahftrd., and ridiculous.
I cannot
!
l8	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
P
I cannot but wonder that Such a tender parent as the good Earl, fliould wish to know, before your departure for Amenca, your final opinion in this interesting affair; that on your return, crowned, as I doubt not you will be, with laurels and victory, you may receive, as ct reward, the hand of the lovely daughter from this fond parent.
I have already figured to myfelf your tete-a-tete with Lord ICichley.-—He tenderly mentions his plan \----yQit all reverential gratitude,, in one of your generous exalted effufions of Soul, make the fatal Sacrifice of your htind, without ypnvJAiirt.—But can it be pofilble that my fnend, Charles Melville, will ever marry the woman Whom he tells me is as indifferent to him as his great grandmother f Foishiel it love !—forbid it honour!—In the utmost impatience of the Sec^ucl of your adventure, 1 remain, My dear Charles,
Most sincerely yours,
HENRY BELLMOUR.
L E '1'-
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	19
I	L E T' TER III.
h
:■	COLONEL MELVILLE, TO SIR HENRY
; '	BELLMOUR.
V
I	Richlcy.Parh, ‘d.une iB/dj.
Dear Belhnour,
< *Y”OUR kind letter arrived otze day too late :—you propheiled juftly, that I Should	my gratitude to get the
better of every other consideration; and that I Should think nothing too great a facnfice for what I owe to this most worthy family.—have, indeed, on a very interesting conversation I had with Lord Richley, been—but when I tell you how cisitically I v/as circumstanced, I believe you v/ill join with me in thiiikiiig I could not do other-'wife.
My good old friend propofed a walk in the park, where, taking me into a Sliady wood, and being bothsteated, after
20	A LESSON FOR LOVERS?
ter Some little silence, he began in this manner.
“ It is nceclleSs, my dear Charles, to siw how anxious I Shall be for your w'elfare in this very important war in which yon are going to engage in America.—Your fate is perhaps of more conSec|uence to me than yon may imagine.—I grow old—and, having long since given up the bufy Scenes of pub-j<lc life, Seek for that quiet in the bo-Som of retirement, I am convinced can never be found in the gay world.—^In regard to any kind of teiTeStnal happi-nefs, exclusive of that which relates to the difpofal in marnage of my darling daughter,—ipy Sweet child,—I liave none :—it is there I feel.’^
Here, Harry, I felt an unaccountable nvifige in my breasi:.—I had before been sitting, dunng his LordShip’s harangue, pinching my rustles, picking , my singers, with my eyes firmly fixed
on
I	A LESSOC^ FOR LOVERS.	21
' on the green turf beneath my feet.— The good man continued.
“ I Say, it is for my Charlotte alone, I have a worldly wish :—when I have bc-Stowed her hand on Some worthy man, I shall Sink into my grave in peace. If a partial father’s SondneSs deceive him not, she will be a treafure to whoever is her future hushand.—Her heart is good;—her education has been under my own eye :—in short, she is ^111 wish her to be.”
Here, my fnend, I interrupted his Lordship, or rather joined with him in jiis praiSes of his amiable daughter.
Lady Charlotte:—is indeed—she is—certainly is—a most accompliSlied young lady—-lovely in her perSon, and every way worthy the higheft regarei.”
A Sentiment of	impelled me
to Say this.—It was, indeed, no more than bare common justice to give this testimony to her ment; but my Lord
instantly
I
1
2 2	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	I
instantly caught it ;—and with visible rapture Seized my hand.
“ You do, then, think my Charlotte amiable?’"
Before I could reply he went on.
’ ‘ Well, Charles, I will be plain with you :—I tell you, sincerely, I know no man in England, hwt yourfelfon whom I would bestow this jewel.—Nay, to Say the truth, I have long had an eye to this matter.—Your dear father and I, when you were both in your infancy, talked this affair over:—I told him, it was more than probable, my little Charlotte (then in her cradle) and his Charles, might one day render our amity stronger, by being united for life. With pleafure,my good young man (he was pleafed to fay) I fee you have sirmnefs to resist the reigning vices of this disiipated age ; your ment in every fenfe of the word, joined with the unfortunate accident which made me take you under my care, has strongly
endeared
!	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	23.
endeared you to me :—I love you, my Charles, for your father’s fake—love you for your own.”
Here, my Henry, I found myfelf So much penetrated—fb much affected by the good man’s tendernefs, I could not restrain my tears—I drew out my handkerchief. LordRichley obferved this, and with pleaSure exclaimed,
Restrain not thofe precious drops, facred to thy ineStimable father.-— When a Soldier weeps—'So far from esteeming it a weakneSs—I think it ,a proof of the most exalted humanity.” We w'ere Some moments flent:— my heart, at that interesting moment, Seemed all gratitude^ and I verily be-lie\T?, had Lady Charlotte been the most disagreeable woman under the fun, I should have thought no Sacrifice too great.
“ Your Lordship (I stammered out) does me too much honour—infinitely too much.”
‘ TeU
<p
!
£4	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	i
V
Tell me—and tell me truly (Said the good man, regarding me with an ; eye of the utmoSt tenderneSs) have you, my Charles, have you ever Seen ! —come, be free, and tell me your ; whole Soul;—have you yet' ever Seen the woman you could prefer to my Charlotte ?—You must, my child, be very explicit—the cafe rec]^uires it:— and tell me likewiSe, could you be happy with her in the marned state
My good Lord (Said I, and here, Bellmour, I Spoke the truth) I can most honestly affirm, I have never yet Seen the woman I could prefer to Lady Charlotte Richley.—As to happinefs, is there a man on earth, in anSwer to" your Lordfliip’s other question, who could not be happy with So lovely a 'woman?”
Whether my old fnend thought this 'a fiml anSwer on my fide, I know not;
—but he once more caught my hand— and in a delighted accent exclaimed ;
—Say
I	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
I —Say no more-—Say no more	it is
V done,—^You must now, my boy, Serve I your king and country this campaign :
I on your return, I will reward you ^ with my Charlotte’s hand.”
I bowed low—and was just making ^ my acknowledgments of gratitude,-when Lord Sandown’s coach drove up the avenue, through the very wood in which we were Seated :—here, therefore, all farther conversation on the Subject was stopped, and we hastily repaired to the houSe. I now felc- an unufual weight at my heart. I Sighed, I knew not why;—and had I then received your letter, Bellmour, I Should have been thoughtful indeed.
Lord Sandown and his party staid Supper, which I was not Sorry for.—I observed my good old fhend to cast a few very intelligible glances at his fair daughter^—and there was, I perceived, a confcioufneSs in her eyes, that convinced me the diScourSe we had in
VOL. I,	B	the
2.6	A LESION FOR LOVERS.
tlie park was before concerted—I believe 1 looked confoundedly awkward the whole evening.
After the company were gone, and we were just retiring to our apartments -—Lord Richley, on my bowing re> Spe’^riSully low, and wifhing him and Lady Charlotte a good night. Suddenly exclaimed, his heart being open, and
his Spirits higher than ufual,-Hang
form and ceremonygive me thy hand, Charles.’’
Saying which, he inStantly put it in tlie fair hand of his daughter.^—-She blushed-—I looked foolish—whilst tlie {rood Earl Said-----“ Thus—thus I
O
join your hands.”
I bowed v/ith the most unfeigned re-Spect.—But was it not odd, Harry, that I did not prefs tliQ pATive hand of • the lady to my lips ?—I have Since recollected tiiiu little circumstance.— ^ Would any other man in, my situation ' Mdh^YG done iii—^^Ah, Belbnour! had < Q	I been
-	I
I
[!
A TISSON POR LOVERS.
' I been truly in Ime with Lady Char--lotte, with what rapture, instead of aU ' that bowing reSpect, fhoiild I have re-xeived from her father Such an incstb mable treaSure as his daughter’s hand!
On retiring to mj apartment, I will honestly confefs to you, I found mySelf So disconcerted—So full of reflection— at what had pasted on this occasion, that I fairly Sat up ruminating and walking in my chamber till day-lights —1 felt I was, by an unaccountable fatality, abfolutely engaged to a woman, who, though amiable and good in a high degree, I was not particularly attached to.—But yet, my friend, I defy any man living (circumstanced as I am in every reSpect to Lord Richley) on Such a conversation as palsied in the park, to have acted otherwisie than I did.— * Heavens! when that best of men was tenderly beStowing on me (apparently his inSerior, in every reSpect) his darling child !—his all!—could I^—could B 2	any
28	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
r' ■
any man—(unprepojjejjed as I am, to any other woman) have been able to utter, My Lord, I am not violently in love “ with your daughter. So I chooSe to decline the honour intended me, lest “ I should hereafter be touched by the “ blind boy in favour of another.”— I defy any man living of the least delicacy to act otherwise than I have done.
Certain it is, the good Earl had firmly fixed his mind on this unionand poffibly one reaSon of my being So en-. tirely his favourite may be, I had never fought, by any means unknown to him, to gain Secretly the affections of his daughter, nuniberleSs as have been the opportunities I have had of So doing.— If his Lordship should give me this merit, I certainly have no right to it; for I honestly confefs, a thought never occurred to me to gain her affections, either directly or indirectly.
I am most critically circumStanced. —Ah, my friend! how apt, how prone
are
I
'	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	29
are we to blame the actions of others!
-—Alas! we little know the intricacy— the peculiar delicacy (as.witneSs mine) of their situation ! Never more will I pretend to arraign the conduct of others, unlefs 1 know their trials.
I know not what ails me—but Something whiSpers to my Soul, I am undone.—Bellmour, 'tis thy foreboding letter.—But it was honest—kind—and truly friendly, and therefore forgive me.
I will take this unaccountable heart of mine most Severely to talk, for even daring to Suggest, that the best of men drew me into this engagement.—Wretch 1 what do I talk of being drawn m .'—-Is not the lady in queStion defervedly esteemed one of the most beautiful women this day in England 1—are not her accomplishments, her temper, and understanding admired by all who know her ?—and am I So blindly foolish, as not to fet a just value on Such a blelsing, given by a fond father to my B 3	arms
50	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
arms unfought P—Ah! rather let me devote my whole life to make her happy» Lady Charlotte then—-But why do I sigh to you! dedicate the remainder of my days :—I mujl not—FUEL not think of any other wmman.
But adieu for the preSent to the Sub- i jecl of love ;—I am now' called to ghry	\
in the field of battle.^—May victory | await our arms in quelling theSe refractory Americans!
Adieu, my faithful—my beloved friend.—If pofiible I will write to you from the port where 1 Shall embark with the troops. In the mean time, believe me I am
__ •
most faithfully yours,
CllAViJLES MELVILLE.
.LET-
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	3!
LETTER IV.
lady charlotte RICHLEY, TO THE HONOURABLE MISS BLANDFORD.
HJunez^th. ■.
E is gone—my Lucy—gone, perhaps for ever !—Yes, Colonel Melville left us yesterday, to hasten with all Speed to this dreadful American war.
I can truly exclaim with poor SiglS* munda :
“ Oh I am nought but tumult,^	\
Fears,, and weaknefsF
The amazing dangers to which he will be expos’d,—the wide watery ex-panSe which So Soon will divide' us,— the daily, hourly perils to which his precious life Seems (from his ardor) to be devoted to his king and country, all contribute to make me wretched.
—You know, my Lucy—you have long known my growing attachment,
B 4	even
f
32,	A LESSON FOR LOVIRS.
even from my earliest yecirs, for this most amiable young man.—He is the first I ever loved :—the first, the only one my young inexperienced heart ever breath’d a sigh for:—can you, then, wonder I Should not feel ten thoiifand anxious fears, in a Separation full of So many dangers ?—Indeed I now look on my Melville as my deS-tined hufband, Since the ecckirciffement has been made by my father a few days Since, of which converfation I gave you an account in my letter of ThurSday last How fortunate that my dear parent’s choice and my own should So exastly correSpond!—Lucy, I shall, I find,—I shall never be able to Support this miserable abfence, if you do not very frequently fend me one of your Spinted and enlivening epistles.—O that that I poSTeffed one half of that delightful stow of Spirits you do !—you perfectly Seem to Set every earthly ea-
* This letter appears not.
lamity
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	33
lamity at open defiance. —it pleaSed Heaven to try you with Such a terrible abSence from a favoured lover as I ri .'l experience, Idl lay my li^"^ not a igle sigh would have eScaped that- it m -ry -ry heart of yours.—You wou^ ■ danced, Sung, and caroll’d away ai^ care at your harpsichord as uSual.
What a day of melancholy reflection was yesterday !—In vain I applied to music, or books for relief; —the former only heightened my fadncSs,—the latter Served to bring him (there is no other him) before my eyes, as pointing out to me the most instructive, or amusing paffages, as uSual :-^I walked in the grove,—^but it Seemed wild and Solitary ;—and I sigh’d when I Saw his favourite bench under the Spreading elm, wdiere he has fb often Sat.—The wilderneSs too—the myrtle bower—the pavilion—in short every Spot, his uSual haunts, brought my amiable Charles to my view, and B 5	with
»
?4	A LESiOT FOR LOVERS.
■c.ib cC : iCiliLu diouglit,—that he may never n.cre reviSit his native land.
His coiiftancy, my dear, I doubt not —his affection, I am convinced, I poiTeSs.—Not that he has ever been very profuSe in profeffions, or vows,, raptures, Sec.; but for this moderation I like him the better:—that dissi-dence, thd.tdmaffumtng manner of his, is to me particularly engaging.—I repeat, I have not a single doubt of his tendereSi: affection: but my SurpriSe was a little excited on the evening, in wdiich my my fond father joined our hands—’(I don’t mean, child, that we were united by the chaplain)—my beloved parent, I fay, put my hand into that of Melville’s -—he held it a few moments—I cottld have preffed hit to my heart—almost by an involuntary impulfe :—but whilst my willing hand trembled at his touch,, his, methought, feemed prijftvccold. Neither did he raife mine to his lips.— Was it not strange —but he was over”
awed
A LESSON FCR LOVERS.
awed by his reSpect—by that insurmountable timidity of his.—It could be nothing elSe.
Methought poor Melville Seemed as much hurt with this Separation as my-Self —He appeared for Some days melancholy, abfent, and thoughtful.—The leave he took at parting was full of re-fped.t: my father was preSeilt; and much as he has forwarded our alliance, yet, no doubt, his prefence must have been a fort of rejiraint on the parting lovePj fide., as well as my own. My eyes followed his horSe, till, to uSe the words ,of poor Imogen in SliakeSpeare, I had brought it,
--------“ By the diminution of Space,
‘‘ To a size no bigger than a gnat;—
“ And then I turn’d mine eye—and wept.”
What ai> age will it be before we can hear from him 1—Pity me, Lucy:
* How willing are we to believe what we ivijh !— and how little did the tender heart of Lady Charlotte know the real cauSe of Melville’s Secret chagrin!
—and
■
/■
A JLESSON FOR LOVERS.
—and I charge you to write as Soon as possible : uSe your utmost: endeavours to diVert my itielancholy.—^You know I am fond of your charafters :—what Sort of ladies are thoSe newly arrived at the grove .^—Heigh-ho 1
** ■ If, in his country’s rights defending,
“ He fhould fome* diSafter prove, dity., with ajfAtion., blending,
“ Will but more increafe my love.”
This melancholy epistle is at last go^ ing to be finished, with affunng you, I am, in all difposttions,
MoSt truly yours,
CHARLOTTE RICHLEY..
LETTER V.
V MISS BLANDFORD, TO LADY CHARLOTTE RICHLEY.,
Monday^ BJandford-CaJlle,.
Upon my word I am ashamed,—absolutely ashamed of you.—W^hy,.my dear, what a iove-stck difmal epiStle have you
written I
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	37
written ! and all for what ? why, truly, becauSe, SorSooth, this Melville (a pretty fellow I grant he is) is gone in pur-Suit of glory; and will return loaded with trophies, and crowned with laurels :—what more can you desire.^ would you have him eternally pinned to your apron-string.^—Fye, for fhame, Lady Charlotte,-—would you have a man, born, I doubt not, to be an honour to his country, and probably the means, in part, of quelling our enemies, would you, I fay, have this man (bred and born a warrior) loitering—idling, and languifhing his life away in the Soft Scenes and fhady bowers of Richley-Park.^—singing to your lute,—and piping to your harpsichord.^—Ah, my dear, would I were with you for an hour I would make you Smile in the midst of all your grave airs, I warrant ye.—I would Soon laugh away all thefe difmal vapours, and deSponding fears, that your letter is full of from one end to
the
58	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
the other.'—In the name o£ goodnefs, child, what would you have ?—^This lovely fellow riFill return—(you know I always admired him)—and return your betrothed and Saithful lover,—vour dear father in raptures,—writingsdrawii —-wedding cloaths elegant and Splendid,—the day appointed,—Lucy Bland-ford your bride-maid,—ceremony pei% formed in the chapel,—journey to London,—fick for a few months,—a lovely boy,'—See. Sec. Sec. All this I prognosticate,—if you will have but a little patience.——Now trust me, my fweet girl, but I would give my very best laced-head to be betrothed.^ as you are, to half as fine a figure,-—to half as accomplished a man as your gallant Colonel.
'And was that too fuSceptible,—too foftmed heart of yours piqued, becaufe Charles Melville did not preSs your fingers till they were black and blue? —^you will call me here a strange madcap.
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	39
cap.—And So I am.—^Poor man ! he was, I doubt not, overwhelmed with confufion at the'goodneSs of the worthy Earl, and with the beauty of his fair daughter.—^He will have his ardors, never fear, child, all in due time. —-Now is my abominable letter stung on the stoor.—Well, come, I will be good and grave, like yourSelf.
And now, my dear Lady Charlotte, all raillery apart, let me intreat you not to give way to a melancholy which can do no good.—^It will hurt yoiir health, and grieve the heart of your beloved father.—Every thing is in the most happy trainimaginable.—Why,-— why for ever will the human heart (and that of our filly Sex particularly) be fo industriousty creating its own imaginary evils, and taking up “ forroiv on inter eft,'’ as if we had not real inevitable calamities enough to struggle with 1—^Alas H
How
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
“ How many pine in want, and dungeon’s gloona? “ Shut from the common air, and common ufe “ Of their own limbs! how many drink the cup “ Of baleful grief, or eat the bitter bread Of mifery! fore pierc’d by wintry winds,
“ How many Shrink into the fordid hut “ Of cheerlefs poverty
Let us, my dear friend, ruminate for one minute on tlieSe real calamities of life, in which thouSands are this moment pining, and then let us be ashamed of “ trifles light as airS^
You desire me to fend you an account of our new neighbours, the fox-hunting Mifs Bounces, or rather the racc-liorsing ladies, who have lately taken that beautiful feat near ours, called the Grove. If it will be any kind of amuSement to your low Spirits, I will endeavour to give you an account of them, from what I Saw when I was Iasi: at Lady Woodford's.
I was, with a large party, making that amiable bride a visit, when there drove up the avenue a prodigious high
phaeton.
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	4I
phaeton, with two very Amazonian-looking ladies in it, drest in Scarlet and gold: and in Short they made a most manialappearance. Their habits,hats, and feathers were all in the most extravagant taSte. They entered the room with the most intrepid air of mafculine affurance. A gentleman who Sat next me, and who enjoyed them above all things, whiSpered ; ‘‘ Thefe girls are fitter to storm a fort than enter a drawing-room.”
pown they fat, with two enormous Ipng hunting-whips in their hands.-— After lifting up their hats, and placing them on the back of their heads, the eldest thus adekefSed herSelf to Lord Woodford :
What a fine cover your Lordship has at the bottom of your park!—are there many SoxeR
Now, my dear, you know Lord Woodford (who, though I really believe him to be one of the worthiest and best of
human
4*‘	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
human beings, if he has any foible, So far from being fox-hunter.,1^ firmly inclined to be a fribble) is delicate to excefs ; a perfect valetudinarian ; almost: afraid the wind Should blow on him ; never on any account mounts a horfe; is chieliy in his Study, or engaged in philosophical expenments:— he, of all men, who is So delicate him-feif, loves delicacy, SoftneSs, and gen-tienefs in our Sex (witnefs the choice of his Sweet bride): he, I Say, afforded at this instant the most striking contrast that ever was exhibited to the stout, Amazonian Mils Bounce, who had put So abrupt and strange a question to his Lordship about	and who, to
uSe the words of a very delicate author, “ looPda noijeV
“ I profeSs, Madam,returned his Lordship in a Soft voice, viSibly shock’d at the air of his guest, “ I knoW not— I never hunt.”
Here^
I
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	43
1
Here, to avoid fays	and fays Jhe^ I
will give you the conversation in the first characters.
Mifs Bounce. Not hunt!—O now I recollect, stis the turf your LordShip is So fond of.—I remember your bay filly Spindle-Shanks winning the Nottingham plate lastyear.—Never was better Sport: the knowing ones were finely taken in —^O’Kelly was beat cj^uite hollow.”
Poor Lord Woodford fat aghast;— whilst my next neighbour, Sir Edward Warner was in ecstasies at a conversation So exquisitely ridiculous, and trod upon my toe, to remark it. So forcibly, that I had almoSl Screamed aloud.
Lord Woodford. “ Indeed, Madam, I never had a horfe ran in my life—of all amufements I dillike horfe-races the most.”
Mifs Bounce. “ Why, sister, did you not tell me that Spindle-fhanks was Lord Woodford’s, and that he was got out of Nut-cracker, whoSe grandam was
Mifs
44	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	'
Mifs Slim, wlioSe great-grandam was O.Drien’s Fly-catcher, who won every thing at York meeting that year;— whofe fire was the famous Bufiris— whofe Sire’s Sire was Sly-boots.^—His colts were remarkably bony and
strong.----You know we had> a colt
out of Sly -boots.”
Mifs Dorothy Bounce. ** I never could tell you, sister, that Mifs Slim’s pedigree was of the line of Busins ;—you are Speaking all this time of Mifs Slammakin, instead of Mifs Slim:—She won the Sweepstakes at the first Spring meeting last year at Newmarket.”
Think, my Charlotte, what a curious conversation this was, for about fifteen ladies and gentlemen, sitting round a tea-table.
Mifs Bounce (reddening.) “ I Should hardly miftake, I think, in Such a matter of conSec[uence.—Well—if it was not you—it was little Tom—or Charles Pigot’s jockey told me this:—I mean
. the
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	45*
the little fellow who always rode in red.”
Mifs Dorothy Bounce. ‘‘ Not in red^ Sister, bust in green:—I know I lost, in betts, a cool two hundred on his head.” Whilst theSe listers were engaged in an altercation concerning the colour of the jockey’s dreSs,—Sir Edward Warner, after endeavouring to compoSe the muScles of his nlible countenance, ad-dressSed himSelf to the eldest lister thus: Sir Edivbfrd Warner. “ I Saw you riding, Ma</lam, the other morning on the Down^;—I think the mare you rode is thd most beautiful creature I ever beheld.-^Pray how old is She ?” Mifs Bounce. “ It is not a mare. Sir, —-it is a gelding:—you mean, I believe, the little Switch-tail poney I was upon. —He sis fiveyears next graSs.”
Mifs Dorothy. “ The gentleman means, I fancy, lister, the mare you was upon last Thursday —you know you
went
46	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
went out upon Molly Mogg to fee the racers fiveatedI^
Mifs Bounce, “ Sure, flster, I know when, and what I mean—-Sure, I know a mare from a gelding.”
It was not, my Charlotte, in human nature to relist almost bursting out into a loud fit of laughter at the cloSe of this curious dialogue.—«And now, I hope, I have given you enough for a Specimen of theSe celebrated ladies.— Thejr Soon took their leave, faying they had a new ftudd building ;—which they must go to inspect—as they must their rubhing-houfeP
Thefe ladies were no Sooner departed, than, as is uSuai, the company, one and ail, vented their opinions pretty freely —but I have neither room nor time to tell you the mirth our maScu-line ladies had excited.
Pity that two women of fortunes, So very large as theirs, and who will probably be a prey to a couple of turf
gamblers,
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	47
gamblers, Should have fallen into this most: ridiculous taste !—But I am told it is going to be the tort among Some very fashionable ladies. No Species of gaming among the men is more abSurd than this.-—In our Sex it is dreadful!—-That maSculine intrepidity, which the ladies now^ So much affect, is to me the most difgusting thing in nature.—Ah, how unlike in air, in drefs,- in manner, is the lovely friend I am now writing to !’—whofe merits are—-whoSe bean, ties are—to ufe an expreffion of my favourite Milton :
“ Not obvious —not obtrusiv'e,
But retiddd’’
I have two more characters to acquaint you with, but must referve them for my next letter, which shall be in a few" days.—Adieu then for the prefent. —Be cheerful,'—-be happy—and believe I am
faithfully yours,
LUCY BLANDFO^D,
L £
^3	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
LETTER VI.
THE SAME, TO THE SAME.
Blandford-Cajile, 'June
J NOW., my dear Lady Charlotte, am going to fulfil my promiSe relative to the little anecdotes, or characters I mentioned I would give you in my laSi. Am I not a vain girl to imagine, or to take it iov granted., that a letter from me can divert that tender melancholy which I fear too much preys on the Spirits of my Sweet friend —But Lady Charlotte commands., and her Lucy obeys.
But to begin my Subject of a Mr. Barton, a character with whom I was perfectly charmed, and who dined with me one day at Lord Woodford’s. Heavens ! how was I delighted with his benevolent Sentiments on even the most trivial Subjects!
Lady
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	49
Lady Woodford’s little Italian greyhound, by an accident, received a violent hurt in its leg. Mr. Barton ran—he stew to take it in his arms;— he bound it up—he fed and cherished it the whole day.
‘‘ People in general,” Said he, ‘‘ do not shew compastion enough to thefe poor animals. What of SenSe and feeling do they not poffefs, in common with ourSelves, I should be glad to know, —Speech is denied them indeed—but’ they have more Sagacity, I fancy, than is generally imagined.—More attention than is commonly paid, is due from us to the brute creation.—I have two old horfes, paSt labour, for whom I have purpofely built a warm comfortable building, and I have ashgned a groom constantly to attend them,—I visit them daily, and feed them often with my own hand—my old houfe-dog, too, who is both blind and lame, is carefully
VOL. I.	C	provided
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
provided for, as an old and faithful friend.”
You, my Charlotte, who know my peculiar attention to the brute creation, will imagine how much theSe benevolent pnnciples prejudiced me in the favour of Mr. Barton.
After dinner, a diScourSe was brought up of the Scarcity of fruit this dry fummer.
“ Indeed,” Said this good-natured man, I never trouble mySelf about I fruit in my own gardens.—I Suffer very ! quietly the blackbirds and thrushes to eat of my cherries, and am amply rewarded for it with their Songs.—As to wall-fruit, the Snails and infects are Suffered, for I never kill any, to feast on them as much as they pleaSe. I have no idea of the rectitude of destroying - an innocent being, merely for eating that food which nature has allotted it in common to eat of; and to v/hicli it has as good a right, for ought I know to
the
A LESSO'N rOR LOVERS^	51
the contrary, as I have myfelf.—^It is astonishing to me that men should exer-' ciSe So much cruelty and tyranny, as they generally do, over this poor inof-fenstve part of the works of creation^ without once constdering that, as ShakeSpeare Says,
“ The poor beetle that we treld upon,
“ In corp’ral fuff’rance finds a pang as great “ As when z. giant dies.”
I Sat all this time, my dear, in raptures, at the conversation of this delightful man.
We afterwards walked in the gardens, where an infect (a Sort of trouble** Some fly) Settled on the arm of a lady preSent. She naturally was going to destroy it. Mr. Barton Stepped haStily to her; “ for humanity’s fake, Madam, let me Save the life of this poor little innocent —what has it done ?—and why should you kill it.^—why should you wage war against an enemy So every way your inferior.^”—Thus Saying, he C z	took
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
took it tenderly in his fingers, and laid it in the midst of a beautiful roSe in the next tree we came to of that kind.— In Short, not a Single incident happened the whole day, in which the extreme compassion of this most humane man did not Shine in high lustre.
Impreffed with the utmost veneration for So benevolent a character, when . 1 returned home in the evening, i gave my dear father an account of ail I had heard and feen, as ufuai ; and am on u the rest, was not a little full of the praifes of the humane Mr. Barton.-— My astonistiment was, however, much excited, when I Saw my father shake his head, and hearci him exclaim,— “ Ah, Lucy !—my poor child—I muSt undeceive you.—I know Mr. Barton well;—this very man, who would not destroy a Snail, nor kill a sty, is perhaps the greatest tyrant, to the utmost degree of cruelty, in his family, that can be imagined: his wife—poor deferving / ^	unhappy
A l.fiSSON FOR LOVERS.	53
unhappy lady, has been long confined to her‘apartment with a dreadful cancer in her breast, the effects of a brutal cruel blow he gave her.—-This is an undoubted fact.—^His eldeSt Son, the most promising young man in the world, whom he uSed, in regard to his union with a lovely young lady of faihily and merit, with the utmoSt treachery in the Settlement of their marriage; and since, has caufed them to be turned out of doors, wholly destitute, and, at this time, they are even in want of the common neceflaries of life, though this cruel parent is exceS-sively nch in money, and has a clear eState of five thoufand pounds a-year. His only daughter, a fine girl of eighteen, by the conStant unremitting cruelty (continued my father) of this hu-mane man of yours, my Lucy, who tells you he builds houfes and stables for his horSes and dogs to die in with comfort,—-his daughter, I repeat, is now in C 3	a deep
5^4	A LESSON EOR LOVERS.
a deep decline ;—nay, has l^een So a considerable time.—-A journey to BriS^ tol, it is Said, might recover her ;—but this, the bad man withholds from one of the beSt and most dutiSul of daughters, alledging, cruelly, that he Shall not indeed Squander his money in journie$ 4:0 public places, under the tiotion of ill-healtbS’
“ Oh Sir,” Said I, “ forbear to proceed —can there be Such a monster in
nature V
“ Yes—;yes”— returned my shther, many Such:-—not kill a sty indeed! ' he ought himfelf to have been hanged many years since for beating a day-labourer almost to death ; for the poor wretch laiiguistied only two days after, and then died.—His feat is about tw^el ve miles from mine,—^Itut I never See nor will converSe with fuch a monster.”
,	O my Charlotte, how little do we
know men from what they friy! the tejl is their aAions.
I now
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
I now muSt tell you a little anecdote, which, as it does honour to the fmceri-ty of our Sex, I think ought to be mentioned. Few women, I fear, would have been So ingenuous, as Lady Sand-ford, who, with her worthy huSband Sir William Sandford, has lately been Settled in our neighbourhood.—The fact I hint is this. It Seems Lady Sand-ford, then MiSs Temple, had always lived with an aunt, who, though in reality, a good woman, was far gone in njany French ndiculous fashions. She had lived much in France, and never dreffed without using a considerable , quantity of rouge. Her young niece was obliged to come into this ndicu-lous cuftom, and likev/iSe continued it when She returned to England.—Sir William Sandford Saw her at a ball at Bath ; and at length, on being farther acejuainted v/ith her amiable manners and accomplishments, fell palsionately in love with her.—Her fortune and C 4	rank
5<5	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
rank in life were eepal to his own; however, he had not yet declared him-Self her lover--—Indeed the idea of her fainting^ which was very visible, was no very fortunate circumStance in her favour, as he was continually told of it. —^Sometimes he believed it true — at others, Such was his affeflion for this really lovely woman, he was al-, most tempted to disbelieve the evidence of his own eyes.—At length he was refolved at once to try her fmccAty in this matter, as well as her love.—-‘‘ If,” Said he to himfelf, “ she regards her face more than ?ne., she will diSavow this odious report:—at least her ma?i~ Iter will convince me, if I tax her with truth or not.”	^
'Idle next morning he waited on MiSs Tbmple, when, being alone witli her, he began a diScourSe of the cen-SoisiouSncfs of Bath.
“ Even you, fair lady,” Said Sir William, ‘‘ do not eScape censiu'e: the.
tongue
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	57
tongue of Hander reports that t he lovely bloom in that fair face of yours is not your own., but the effect of art.—• Can it be poffible ‘‘ Why, yes-— (Said the Sweet unaffected girl, with an air Somewhat confuSed, though her eyes beamed with truth) it is not only poffible., but it is true.—I will tell you frankly, Sir William, how it is.”
Obferve her merit in this, my dear! for the Baronet had not then declared himfelf, and she might have imagined Such a confeshon from herSelf might at once have damped his fajjlon^ which was very evident to her and all her acquaintance :—yet fuch was her adherence to truth and fincerUy., that she was refolved to Sacnfice all other considerations to it.—Great, therefore, I Say, was her merit, in making the acknowledgment.—But to proceed.
“ Yes, Sir William,” repeated she with her ufual fweetneSs, “ I fairly and honeStly acknowledge the charge.— C 5	I'he
5^	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
The truth is, I have long lived in a country, and with a relation, wsith whom, from unavoidable neceffity, I was obliged to conform in an article which I was convmced could not cor^ nipt my heart, nor hurt my morals.. In France, rouge is looked upon as innocent as hair powder is in England.. —I repeat I do ufe it—and, indeed, ufe it conflantlyS'
At that moment a natural bliifh dy^ed > her cheek with a deeper vermillion,— and She apparently Seemed confufed.
Sir William, aSronished at the extreme ingenuoufnefs and fimflicity. of her confeffion, beheld her with a fort of rapture.—The good fenfe, as well as franknefs of her unaffected anfwer,. charmed him to cxcefs.—She certainly midA have clifavowed the charge :—* and I am half inclined to think, few ladies, beside Mifs Temple, would have acted as Sne did.—^To be brief, he acknowledged his paffion, and in two
months
X
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	59
months after they were maiTied. They are now Settled near us, and I am hap’ py in the acquisition of So very amiable a woman. You will believe me when I tell you, that she instantly burnt her rouge., her cofmetics., Sec, and never after refumed tliem.—To fay the truth, So pretty a woman as Lady Sanclford stands in no need of foreign aids for beauty.
My father perfectly adores her for her sincerity.—^You know he is often Severe on the foibles of our Sex.—►You w'ould Hugh to hear him exclaim,—I defy any other woman in England to have acted like Lady Sandford on Such a charge.—No :—-So far from' owning it, though painted an inch thick, and looking like a Jhiccoed-wall., they w^ould have drawn tliemfelves up with great indignation, and in high wrath, v/ith a tofs of the head, exclaimed,—‘‘ I paint. Sir?—I Scorn your words.—Good Hea~ vensl-—^I would not for the Vvorld be
guilty
6o	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
guilty of Such a deception.—You offend me beyond meaSure, Sir, with your abominable conjecture :—and from this day forward, I defire never more to See your face.—Paint indeed! very fine, truly 1—No, I thank nature I have no occasion to ufe an to gain lovers.'
Thus my poor good father runs on with what the fex in general would fay on Such a home charge, whilst he acknowledges Lady Sandford Should have a huft erected to her memory.—Indeed I think So too.—Don't you., my dear?
I am like wife happy in the acquisition of another amiable neighbour, Mrs. Falkland.—I think I must give you a Short account of her, as well as of her sister, who is a profelJed beauty, as it will confirm my constant maxim, how much more probable a woman of good temper and good understanding is likely to become a vaife, than a mere vain, dresiing, affected, though handfome girl,
fiuttenno;
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	61
stuttering about at every place of public dillipation.
It is an unfortunate truth, that most of our Sex wisti to be admired, yet tike the utmost pains to Ihorten the term of admiration, by exhibiting So many follies, that instead of love, they excite pity^ which generally borders upon contempt.
The celebrated Congreve mentions a lady who was So beautiful, that none could view her without admiration ; but who was Such an idiot, that She could not Speak without making herfelf ndb culous.—'I’hat witty author justly remarks on the occasion,
“ That what hep eyes	her tongue
unbound.^’’
But let it be remembered by thoSe . who are. not idiots, but bavins; great mluhility of tongue, can talk, with Seeming propriety, on many common and trifling Subjects that
y What
/
62	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
“ What their eyes enthrall.^ their deeds unbind.'’^
For it will render them equally ridiculous to ct3, as to [peak nonferificrilly. I would recommend to my Sex to refigii this univerSal thir[i for empire, and consider,,
One Self-approving hour, whole years outweighs
Of stupid starers, and of loud huzzas.”
In fact, we pile but by oh eying; for man will always bow to tlie shrine of beauty, if he fancies it an act of his oivn choice, and does not think he is compelled to it.
An exorbitant fondnefs for drefs is another particular which renders our Sex ndiculous, where they think to gain admiration. An unaffected plainnefs in attire, as well as in manners, will always gain esteem; whilst a gaudinefs of external appearance and affectation of behaviour, are certain to meet with contempt. But, alas ! this pashon, from the higheft to the lowest, Seems to be epidemical,
and
A LESSON for lovers.	6^
hnd has obSolutely infe3ed the whole Sex.
“ This universal paffibn- we eSpy,
Gleams in the low, and glitters in the higkf In variegated top-knots, here difplayM,
“ Aud there refulgent, in the gems, parade.”
But I promised my Charlotte I would give her Some account ef the different characters, 8cc. of thefe two Sisters, the Miffes Bromley.
Sophia, at the age of eighteen, was very homely in her features, and her shape was far from being formed with Symmetry. Her understanding was however extremely good, and her dif-|)ofition remarkably Sweet and gentle, ^he pasted her time occastonally in the domeStic duties—in curious needleworks, and in cultivating her mind with the most approved authors.
Caroline had received from nature all the charms she was able to bestow. —Flora Seemed to have painted her ^cheeks with the dew of rofes, and to 3	-	have
64	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
have lent the ripenefs of the finest cherries to her lips : her Symmetry of Shape was equal to her beauty, and in Sid her beauty excelled all defcription.
But, alas! Mifs Caroline was too Ien-fible of her charms. Proud by nature, fhe was undone by flattery, and may be Said to be a martyr to prYtife; for j no compliment, however over-fhAined i and hyperbolical, was paid her, but She implicitly believed it to be true. Nay, when stie was called a goetdeSs, fhe never thought it a word of courfe in the System of male flattery, but adually fancied herSelf to be Somewhat divine., and consequently imagined that no mortal existing could be worthy of her.
Mr. Falkland, amiable, worthy, rich, and 3mung, Saw her by accident, and became deeply enamoured of this vain lady. He, lover-like, told her he had made an enumeration of her various charms, and had found them to amount in number cxaO.lv to ten thonSand. Ca-
j
2 .	. roline,
r'
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	6^
roline, fancying Site had him entirely at her devotion, determined to ufe her power over him, for Some time to try his Jove., for love and patience are by many women ufed asSynonimous terms.
But Falkland happened^ v/ith all his merit, not to be the patient man in England, or at least he was not So far gone in love, but he understood that an ajfront was not a compliment; So that upon the first rebuff from Caroline, one half of her charms flew away, and vanifhed; and the remaining five thoufand proved to be in a critical situation; for Soon after, on being refuSed her hand to dance with him at a ball, and giving it to a rival ; together with her frowns, affected airs, and coquetry the whole evening, occasioned Falkland So to recover his lost reaSon, bsiat the once beautiful and admired Caroline now appeared to him the most diSagreeable woman in the BritiSh dominions. Such are the effects of pride and vanity.	'
Caroline’s
66	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
Caroline^ late lover having very frequently visited at the houSe of Air. 'Bromley, could not but obServe the striking contrast in the behaviour of the twm daughters. I 'he charms of the gentle undjj-efied Sophia Soon found the way to his heart.—He was amazed to think he had So long overlooked them ; he Soon declared himfelf her lover, and in a short time after became her happy hushand. Thus did SweetneSs of manners, and good Senfe, without the aid of ferjond charms, triumph over all the airs of an nniverfal admired beauty.-—YYom a variety of Such incidents—incidents wdiolly owing to her own folly, the justly difappointed Caroline has almost fretted herfelf into a consumption.
Some Sweet lines of Dodsiey occur _ to me on this occasion.
“ V/hat is the tin<5lure of the sineft
“To peace of mind and harmony within?
What is the Sparkling of the brightest; eye.
To the Soft Soothing of a.calm reply!
“ Can
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	67
“ Can comlinefs of form, of fiiape, or air,
“ With comlineSs of words and deeds compare? No;—thofe, alas! th’unwary heart mvey gairtj But thefe, thefe only, can the heart retain.''*
Do, my dear Charlotte, write, and tell me your Spirits are better.
You ash me, in one of your former letters, to tell you if the amiable Baronet, Sir Edw^ard Willis, who So often vifits here, and whofe feat is in our neighbourhood, has yet declared him-Self my lover.
No—no^—child;—we are certainly most singularly circumstanced.—I fancy we must remain a brace of PlatonicSy an’ pleafeye.—We affuredly are equally Satisfied with each other ;—nay, we have absolutely entered into a correspondence of writing—(would you be-> sieve it .^)—Wte, however, intend, my dear, that odious love Shall be quite out of the question, and be quite content with Sure fnendfhip. What our stars
may
68	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
may have in Store for us, I know not ; but at preSent we mull: only Scribble on the inolb indifferent Subjects:—we muSi, So the fates will have it, though we See each other every day, Sliut our eyes and ears to each other.	‘
You know I am engaged, though he never v/as the man of my choice, to
Lord M-------, wdio went to the South .
of France above a year Since for the recovery of his health, and whom com* ' mon report now Says is dead, though his death has never been fully authenticated. Some Say, he is no more,—
Some, that he is recovering. Is not this uncertain State of SuSpenSe the moSt tantalizing thing in nature ?—
My agreeable friend is likewsiSe in exactly the Same unfortunate predicament, he being contracted to a lady of	!
great fortune (now in the West-Indies) by the parents of both at an early age, when their young hearts could have no Share at all in the matter.—A report
came	<
!
. A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	, 69
came over last: year that this lady had died of a putrid fever,—and Several circumstances were mentioned to corroborate the report; but still none that, to a man of Such nice honour. Such delicate Sentiments as Sir Edward Willis, can justify him, at preSent, to make another choice.—Thus cntically—thus delicately—my dear Charlotte, are we both circumstanced.—In my own breast I, however, verily believe my old lover is dead, and that Sir Edward’s Lady likewise is no more :—but time can alone only unravel this mystery.
That my friend could be infpired with a tendernefs for me exceeding the bounds of common amities., I certainly believe ; and I will confeSs to you, if I ever were to play the fool, and marry, —^why he—he indeed, to Say the truth, would be the only man I ever did, or ever can love.—But more of this in my next.
^	One
70	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
One of our Servants, who is coming your way, conveys this long packet to your fair hands.—I expect you will
write by his return, and-
This instant I See my Platonic friend driving up the avenue.—Pie beckons me.—Adieu, then, my dear, you will excufe my abrupt conciufion, and believe me ever
Your affectionate
LUCY BLANDFORD.
LETTER VII.
LADY CHARLOTTE RICHLEY, TO MISS BLANDFORD.
MRichky-Parh^ July lO.
Y Spirits, I thank Heaven, joined with the kind endeavours of my lively amiable Lucy, are better.
My fiither has had a letter from my Melville :—-he writes he was well— but I rather wonder, my dear, there
was
f
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	yi
was not one line for me in the packet. Was it not. odd? not one line indeed. But in writing to one^ he wrote to hotht and I certainly ought not to expeest the hurry and fatigue he must now ne-ceSSarily be engaged in can give him time to fit down and write love-letters. We are both acquainted with each other’s hearts; they are united, and that is Sufficient.—May the gallant youth live to return in health and Safety to the fiiithful arms of his Charlotte ! This is my constant and most ardent prayer.
But now to vour Platotiic affair.—
Ah Lucy !—you are fairly in for it— over head and ears, child.—Methinks I long to whiSper in the ear of yom* fentimental friend., that
“ Friendfhip with woman, is sister to loved''
Never let the man imagine, that, with all his philoSophy, he will be able to hold out a'gainSt Such an affemblage of both outward and mental charms, as
he
72	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.’
he will find at Blandford Castle:—he is abfolutely fool-hardy to attetupt Such a warfare.— Ah, my Sweet Liicy, to See you daily—to hear you play—to liS-ten to your impassioned notes, Arc. See. Ac. he had need be endued with the total apathy of a monk of the order of La-Lrappe.
You are, indeed, both most critically circumstanced with regard to the life or death of thofe quondam lovers a-broad. Beware—beware, my dear girl, how you admit this tyrant love, under the Specious Sanction offtnendjhip.
I am all impatience to' See, and I moSt ardently beSeech you to- Satisfy my longing curioSity, Some of tboSe letters you mention, which paSs betwixt your Platonic friend and your-Self;—they muSt be curious.—^You are both violently in love, child, with each other, I am convinced ;—and yet, for- . Sooth, cahn., fober friendjhip only dictates to your pens.—How is this?—and
what
r
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	73
what Sort of a connection is this to be ? —-I am dying to See this new mode of conversing—all pure fentmcnt!
“ Hail Sacred friendstiip—passion moss: refin’d,
“ Thou puress rapture of the human mind,
“ Two hearts united, by txne frie7id/hip'’s bond,
“ Spurn felfifii views, and to excels are fondA
Prithee, my dear Lucy, diSpatch a Servant with Some of thofe love-letters —wdth Some of thofe effusions of enthu-fiaftic friettdjhip., I meant to have faid.
I heartily thank you for your agreeable account of your horfe-racing ladies. —Heavens! what jockeys in petticoats!
I hohour the ingenuous confesiion of Lady Sandford—it was- frank—it was noble.—I will, however, hope for the honour of my fex, there are others who would have acted as sincerely as She did.'
What a wretch is the falfely-hu-mane Mr. Barton! v/ell might my Lu-cy approve his Seeming benevolence, who feels not only for every Species of
VOL. I.	D	human
74	A LESSON FOR LOVERSi
human miSery, but extends her Compassion to every infect, however Small, and to our weak fight infignificant.— The blade of lowly grafs, which trembles to the wind, my Lucy, in her evening walk, will not tread on, left, as I have heard her often remark, fhe fliould crufti to death the little inhabitants that may have taken tlicsir Shelter on its ssender blades. I wonder not then, my dear, that yott who poffefs extensive benevolence in lo high a degree Should think So favourably of this Mr. Barton. Heavens ! what art—what deceit muit that man be posseffed of!—Pity, as the ingenious author of the Spectator ob-ferveSjbut there could be a cfyftalcafe-7nent to the human breaft !—what difco-vcnes should we then make !—Perhaps we should See the hemd of a certain ve- . ry amiable young haronet., panting with the moft tettder pajjlon., whilft his tongue only talks offiIettdJhip and cold amity. ~I should, too, perhaps, fee the little
hetrt I
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	75
heart of a certain tender fair lady of my acquaintance in 2iviokntwhenever the Said agreeable man appears, and all this is yet only for mere friendjhip! A favourite author of mine (the ingenious Dr. Langhorne) Speaks with much truth and humour on this kind of information : he wishes for a “ jnicrofeops for the mindV
“ It were to be wiflied,’' fays he, “ that we could extend the philofophy of optics So far as to procure a inicro-fcope for the mind; but I would have the uSe of it lie under thefe i'eftrictions; In the first placej no fool, reputedly Such, should be permitted to apply it, any more than a Sword should be put into the hands of a madman; for the fight might make him miferahle,, but it woul'd not make him ‘ivifo. In the next place, I would have it fo constructed, that it could not be applied to the breast of another, for then the whole chain of Society would be broken to pieces.
D z	Hulbands
y6	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
HuSbands and wives, parents and children, brothers and Sifters would, in many families, be at open war.—Peace would entirely deSert the court, and would Scarce find refuge in the hamlet.
■—The competitors for wealth and power would be Shocked with the execrable wiflies and designs of each other; ' and the hard-handed peaSant would behold his neighbour thirSting for his funeral, and his farm. But there are two characters to whom I would have it applied, viz. the fanatic, and the flatterer, and at the Same time I would have them Sensible of its application.—Such ridiculous circiimStances would be the moft adecpate punisiiment imaginable.”
Perhaps, after all, it is beft to take things as they are, and that to be happy, we muft be deceived.
My father, this moment, calls me to walk in the park.—Your ftImd,l think, my dear,caufed you to break off abruptly your laft kind epiftle :—jt)u will ah
low
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	77
low my excufe to be as just, L am convinced ; therefore shall only add, that I expect the precious depoft I aSk for very Speedily. In the mean time, I am. Most faithfully yours,
CHARLOTTE RICHLEY.
LETTER VIII.
MISS BLANDFORD, TO LADY CHA.RLOTTE RICHLEY.
TBlandford-Cafile, July
O let my dearest friend fee how absolute her commands are to her faithful Lucy, I difpatch a perfon.with two or three very hdrmlefs epistles,— quite ill the platonic JyJiem. I fend too, by the fame conveyance, a Small box of shell-flowers, a pair of garters for good Lord Richley, and a new faSiiion-ed little card-purfe for your Ladyship. —A fit ajjbnment, you will fay, of trifles^ to be Sent with love-letters,—But, D 3	child,
yS	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
child, they are not love-letters^ I will affirm:—I might receive juft the fiimc from my great grandfather.—I should, however, tell you that the Subject of one of my friend.s is partly to ash pardon for what / had called a capital offence :—though I don’t fay it was fo very—very capital a crime —but, liow-ever, it was wrong.
Now my Charlotte exclaims laugh-' ing, “ What, did your fellow Platonift Steal a kifs, or prefs your hand, or— what other enormity did he commit?’^ Laugh, my dear, if you will, but I Will tell you exactly how the affair happened.
I had juft finished Singing, and playing on the harpllcord, the favourite Italian air of Se non Felicice., of Sac-chilli’s,—when my hand happening to lay carelessly on the edge of the harpfi-cord, he Snatched it to his bofom. .
“ lied, you cry, wliat he?”
Wliy,
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	79
Why, my dear, Sir Edward Willis happened to be in the parlour with me alone, and him I mean.-—Before I could recollect myfelf, he preffed it to his bo-Som,and then to his lips, Vvsith a fervAtr I had never obServed in him before.-—« I was excessively stuttered to fay the triith ; and blustied as red as your Colonel’s coat.—Eye-—fye for Shame, stammered I—1 am quite astonished at you—'-Sir Edward.”—But InSlead of relinquishing my hand, he continued imprinting a number of kiffes on it— (Blefs me, my Charlotte, the red marks remained half an hour afterguards)-— whilst he foftly exclaimed, ‘‘ My angel, my divine Lucy, pardon me.”—I began to look extremely grave—and starting up, walked to tlie window.—If . you, Sir Edward,—I do not:—” I hardly, indeed, know what I did fay, for in truth I was violently stuttered with rmger. Company coming in, pre^ vented his anfweistng,—but, however, D 4	til is
8o	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
this affair funk deep. When I retired to my clofet—I muff (faid I) put a Stop ’ to theSe liberties for the future.—To kifs my hand in fuch a manner !~^into-icrable !
T’lie next day I Sent him the following letter.
■'■■■■■	SHKSPPK*—'   '
“WHERE ffeptyoLirreafon, my good fnendjwhenyoii So far forgot yefterday, that the hand you feized is not mine ? —you know well that aftion was in-confiffent with the charadler you have always maintained.—Scarcely could I believe the evidence of my fenfes when you So far forgot yourSelf. And were not your Sudden exclamations as improper as your action of Seizing my captive hand, and almoff devouring it:—Don’t accufe me of an affected nicety in this matter; I only appeal to your judgment, whether it was right or wrong.— Nay, I have another bill against you.
“ - A
\
A LESSOR FOR LOVERS’.	Bl
“ A few days since, when we were sitting in the myrtle bower, and talking on the inoSl: indifferent Subjects,-— did you not begin a conversation about my future welfare in life, with regard to temporal happineSs,and end it with a deep sigh accompanied with theSe words uttered with a particular emphasis ?— “ ExcuSe my earnestneSs, MiSs Bland-ford, for indeed I love you most sincerely.”—Have you forgot this—If you have, permit me to remind you of it, that you may not, in future, allow your-felf So great a latitude of expression :— I must, and do absolutely insist on the total banishment of the monoSyllable Jove. Not that, according to its juSt and proper signifi^ction, I pretend to object against it J^but then by love I mean no guilty pstshon,—no cnminal desire, but the most exalted esteem and regard, founded on reaSon and virtue, d'o this I have no objection. I would not admit a single doubt that your Sen-D 5	timents
^2	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
tinicnts are leSs refined than mine on this Subject :—butjfituatedasu'fare ,the word is certainly exceptionahky and muj} by all means be diScarded.
“ As to our epistolary commerce, it certainly is not only innocent, but laudable, if kept under proper restrictions. Your correspondence is, in fact, too valuable to me to bear the thought of losing it without concern ; but there is no blesiing in this life which I would purchafe at the expenSe of the least wilful deviation from the strictest rules of propriety and decorum. On reflection, I am convinced you will think mer/VN, So long as the ohjeBs of our former attachments are fuppofed to remain in the land of the living.—Friendfoip I allow, but must utterly forbid love. Adieu.
LUCY BLA NI)FORD.”‘
Now, Caroline, I stiall give you my fiend’s anfwer to the foregoing epistle, —and here it is.
BLESS
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	^3
‘‘ BLESS lis I what a rout do you make, my charming friend, about the moSt innocent thing in the world !— Fie!—to be angry at a harmleSs little civility, authonzed by daily custom, and which I might have uSed to any woman breathing !—What, after all, was this great and mighty crime ? why, truly, I happened accidentally to Seize on the white wonder of dear Lucy’s hand.—Accidentally., I repeat, for 1 call Cupid to witnefs, I had no malice pre-penfe; my crime was the effect of inadvertency ofily:—nay, ’tis you, and jywSonly, my lovelyare to blame: why did you melt my foul by your im-pafiioned notes, which as Milton fays,
“ Would create a foul, under the ribs of death.”—
Why, I repeat to you, do you exhibit . thofe too powerful attractions 1—Be-caufc you yourfelf are^ a mere stock—a stone,—does it follow that all your hearers and beholders must be fo too 1 and is it rightyouSIiould makemountaihs
2	of
ss4	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
of mole-hills ?—Depend on it, my phi-lofophy will never So far defert me, as to lead me into an irregular past]on; though you, perhaps, are the only lady in the world who could make me forget fome certain vows formerly made to ‘ one, to whom (if living) I will perform. —This I will however fay, that if I am to be ever in love, it can be with none hwx. yourfelf; for you fo totally eclipfe every other woman whom I have feen, that I fear no arrows from any other quarter. But the worst is already past.
‘ ‘ I have feen your lovely form—I have heard your enchanting harmony—I have read your inimitable letters—and yet my heart is ivhok; abfolutely found as you would have it; and my danger is every day lefs in proportion to my fa^ milianty with you. Your peace, my dear Mifs Blandford, is dearer to me than worlds, and nothing is farther from my thoughts than that I fhould, for one Syigle moment give you pain.
This
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
This I give you under my hand, that if I should love you, even to defpcra-tion, you shall never know it.
“ But what a little tyrant you are to infill: ojpL my blotting out that beauteous monoSyllable called love, though each dear letter of its name is harmony! —whofe magic found controuls the human mind:—and yet, forSooth, theSe four little magical letters, which com-pofe this dear, Soft, and Sweetest oS all words are to be eraSed!—and for what.? I should be glad to knpw:—I'fancy even Diana herfelf, or the strictest vef-tal^Yixgm that ever existed, would have been puzzled to have found a reaSon for i" Look ye, Madam, Til do what I can to oblige you; Til forbear this hateful word, as long as it is neceffary, but I hope you will permit me, at a proper feafon, to make uSe of it again: —and indeed, what a stupid figure will a letter make from one end to the other, that is destitute of this pretty
little
I
26	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
little Syllable ! The empire of dullncSs will Soon take place without it.-—But the fair Lucinda commands, and I obey.
“ If with the Jia7ne of Icve yow will not blefs,
“ Then term my	frletid/Iiip in exccfs;
“ Adopt a term, and give it to my flame;
“To keep the paJJionj I’ll relign the name.'’'
“ But in feisious SadneSs, inv too ami-able correspondent, are you not a little priidiJJo all this time.^—I have not a friend in the world whom I have not often told I love Jhtcercly. Why, child, it is a mere expression of courje: where then the mighty crime \—But be eafy,— be pacified:—if I love yoit to excels, you iliall be as ig;norant of it as- the' bull on the marble monument of your mother: for what sso;nifies talking; of love to Such a breathing Jlatue as yourfelf!-—you will allow me, I hope, as a fid.end^ to fay, that I am (without difputing about vjords )
Most devotedly yours,
EDWARD WILLIS.^"
Here,
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	ss7
Here, my Charlotte, was fresh matter for altercation.—'Aye, and for an- ' ger too.—O this Sex !—how does he . harp on the word—the very word I would have (between us) totally expunged!—My anSwer was as follows.
‘‘ STILL—Still, m'y esteemed friend^ will you give my fcrupulous delicacy cauSe to reproach you.—Methinks you talk of love more than friendjhip.—In the name of goodnefs what would you desire —In truth, you have little to lament.—If my conversation—my letters—my music, Ac. are So agreeable to you as you would make me believe, in truth’s name do you not enjoy them all? —Ceafe, then, to dwell on imposiibili-ties ; but let us be content with calm, Iohev friettd/hip—a more intimate union, depend on it, was never meant for us.— Nay, for my part, I can form no higher
idea
88	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
idea of happineSs in this world, than of what my ideas oi friendflnp are capable. You Speak of /ove, as of Something infinitely beyond it:—Now this, for the life of me, I cannot comprehend : what generally (to my way of thinking) goes by that name, appears to me to be a mere phrenzy of the mind, incon-SiStent with reafon, nay, often with common fenfe. Esteem and admiration, founded on reafon and virtue, are to be found in fnendjhip.—What then is this exalted Something which you call love ?—I have no comprehenfion of the thing at all: there is, perhaps, Some defect in my heart, which renders me incapable of feeling this pastion, and consequently it must be impoflible for me to form any just conception of it.— have often heard people talk of the bliSsful union (as they term it) of love, founded on friendjhip., of a tendemefs. which unites nvo hearts in one; and that, 3	this
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	89
this state, when it ha^ the Sanction of marriage, is productive of the most exalted Satisfaction the human Soul can know ;—that it is a state of perfect ^ happineSs beyond the power of language to exprefs or thoiight to conceive : but alas—alas! where Shall we find this happy state ?—It is nothing elSe, I much fufpect, but a mere fiction of fancy:—a pleasing picture of what never was, nor ever will be found -on earth.—If this be the/o-nc you mean, stis the effect of imagination only, take my word for it:—a virtuous friendJhAp,
I will maintain, is worth a hundred Such loves, and the noblest affection on this side the grave: nor do I wilh a greater blefling than a virtuous friend.— As to the word love., which you make Such a pother about, on my baniShing it, I have no objection to a definition of it, provided it is not applied to tnyfelf
“ Adieu
90	A LESSON FOR LOVERS,
Adieu for the prcSent;—be fatiS fied	jtnetidfloip^ ALyid believe that I
shall ever remain, whiljl you deferve it, your very corclial friend and sincere ivell-ivijhetd
LUCY BLANDFORD.’^
Here, my dear, follows Sir Edward’s
anSwer.
** /
HEAVENS ! MiSs Blandford, how formally do you conclude your kSt letter ! CordJal ftdettd!—fncere^ell-iui/her! Is it come to this?—but I must be dumb as the grave.—Not a single Syllable' of complaint shall drop from my pen,— though my poor heart is—no matter.
-—But to proceed.
“ How shall I reconcile this mighty difference between our ideas of love and f dendjhip ^ how shall I define the latter to you, Madam,1 repeat, who Speak with So little reverence of that omnipotent charm of nature as to call
it
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	9.I
\t pkreuzy ;—to you,, who are guarded by an\bSolute/;yh/://Z^//zA’from its operations'? The definition of this pleasing pretty madneSs, you will, however, allow me to make, and I wsill avail my-,felf of that allowance. But obServe, I do not form my ideas of it, from wiiat I have read, or from what I have remarked in others, but from what I jeel my Self.
‘‘ Love, therefore, is an affemblage of Soft ideas, the moif clietnng, and comforting to the human mind imaginable : a principle So divine, that it teaches us the most tender benevolence to the party beloved, maiigre every Sentiment of our own interest, or advantage : a passion to which we may afcribe the most exalted heroifm—a passion (in few words) whofe infancy is moSt pleaf-ing to individuals concerned; whofe progrefs is the moSt fruitful of wmrthy actions, whereby mankind can be benefited, and which state is the accomplishment of one of nature’s high appointments,
p2	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
pointments. In Short, two words, Madam, give ns to underfiand what each other mean. Your friendjhip is only friendship fimple and alone ; my love is love and friendSliip blended, and that you must acknowledge to be a state of the most Supreme Satisfaction. Believe me this state is Something more than chimera ;—But I will no farther attempt to defcrihe, what, perhaps, when you meet with a felloiv-mind to your own, endued with taste, SenSe, and , fweetnefs of temper, you will acknowledge to be that state of happinefs nearest approaching to Heaven. That your guardian angel may have this state of blifs in Store for my fair friend, is the ardent wish of
Her faithful
EDWARD WILLIS.”
And now, my dear Lady Charlotte, what do you think of our conteji., and our correspondence ?—I doubt you will think us both a couple of fools, who are quarrelling about words and v/rang-
ling
A LESSON TOR LOVERS.	93^^^
ling about the Shadow, when we ought to embrace the Substance.
We are now upon Such a footing of parched formality, that you would die to fee us : “ MiSs BlandSord this—and IAadam do you pleafe to do that, &c.” —whilst I put on my gravest airs, and take care not to Sing my love-stek, paS-stonate, dying airs at the harpSicord, when we are alone.—Heigh-ho—I heartily wiSh I knew of a certainty whether that quondam lover of mine. Lord
J\1----j were really dead, or whether
he does ever intend to return and give me his hand.-—^SuSpenfe is a dreadful state : and to fay truth, I really believe poor Sir Edward knows a little of that imeaSy state, as v/ell as my Self:—would ♦ you believe it, my dear? since my late prohibition, the man sighs,—walks by moonlight in a grove of willows near his park,-—(pray Heaven he does not throw himfelf into the stream which murmurs by)—is abfent,—peevish. His
Servant
5^4	^ LESSON FOR LOVERS.
Servant lately astcing him (as my Kitty tells me) if he dined at home, was an-Sw^ered wdth a Smart box on the ear,' and “ Don’t trouble me with your impertinence.”
This, from a maSter of the best temper in the world, w^as astonishing:— however, he turned round directly— “ Pardon me, Frank,—here’s a guinea to make you amends.—And do you hear ?—Go to the post-houSe, and See if there are any letters for me come from the Wej'i-IndKsL
Now Frank, who had certainly never studied the learned Mr. Locke’s famous treatiSe of the liuman Understanding, —in which that great author So admirably treats of a chain of ideas following each other —poor Frank, I lay, could not conjecture,—why his good-natured maSter Snould firil: give him a box on the car, then give him a guinea, and bid him See if There were any letters from the Wefl-Indks*-AL\o'W^ this I can
account
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
account for,—and So can you, iny dear, I fancy.
I can pretty well prognosticate what loth our fates will be.—His fine West Indian lady will return; he will give her his hand, from motives of honour ;—» they will be juft civU to each other;— meet in public;—have Separate equipages, and Separate houSes;—whilSt Sometimes he will perhaps breathe a gentle sigh (am not I a vain hussfey, Charlotte ?) when he thinks of the myrtle bower at BlandfoiTl-CaStie.—His cafe will not be fino;nlar .-—hundreds are at least leading the fame infipid, wretched life, whom their parents (as in Sir Edward’s cafe) have Sacnficed the peace of their cliildren from lucrative motives only.
Your poor Lucy, too, my dear, will lead much the Same hum-drum—as it 'were—kind-of life, as Pnor admirably calls it, wsith my gouty lord and master
Lord M-------. He, too, will return
and hobble with me to the altar:—I
shall
I
96	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
Shall grow Soon peevish ; diScontented; —a mere mope ;—out of humour with every body, and every thing;—dwindle into a downright, pale-faced woman of quality!—read Sometimes over my poor Sentimental Edward’s charming definition of love;—and sigh becaufe I cannot find it true.
But here I must do my good parent the justice to fay this curious match with Lord M------was not of his pro-
curing.—I fancied, forfooth (as does many a foolish girl who enters the state of matisimony) that it was .absolutely neceffary to be married; and that it was not very material, if the man had a good character, whether I could hang or drown my-
felf for him.—Lord M-------had an
excellent character—and though old enough to be my father, I thought it was a state to be preferred to that of living an old maid.—My good aunts, PriScilla and Deborah, had So prejudiced
i
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	97
diced me against: the state of ancient virginity, that (foolifh thing as I was) I imagined a^ij hufband was to be preferred to none.—Very falfe reaSoning this, you will Surely Say.—But yet, I venly believe half the young women (aye, child, and old ones too) run into the nooSe of matnmony, with even a man barely indifferent., for the above reafon: but if ever afterwards they find they have a hearty dreadful is the conSet^^uence.
You, my Sweet fnend, who will be happy in the man you redly do love, and by whom you are equally beloved, will run no nSque in this most important affair of marriage. T'he extreme ill health of my ancient lover obliged him to go abroad ;—in the mean time, I became acquainted with this very agreeable man, Sir Edward Willis. Pray Heaven that I may not find I have a heard in his favour !—But feriousty, my dear, \Il do find I am too fenjlble of
VOL, I,	E	his
9^	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
his thouSand perfections, however mife-rabk I may be, I will take care not to make myfelf infamous, as too many of our ladies have done, when under the like circumstances.
I am happy if my letters (Such as they are) can, as you kindly tell me they do, divert in the Smallest degree the fangs of abSence—that death to love.
If I meet with any thing in the circle of my acquaintance worth communicating, I will inform you; in the mean time I give you full leave to laugh over the incloSed pacquet, and SubScribe myfelf ever, ever
,	'	YouFs, most sincerely,	|
LUCY BLANDFORD,	j
An interval now paSTed of Several	|
months, during which many letters were written between Lady Charlotte and her agreeable friend: the editor,
however,
A. LESSON FOR LOVERS.	9<>
however, has not inSerted them, as they contain nothing matenal to the thread of this history.—The most material circumstance, during this period, was a Severe action which had happened in Ameisica ;—in which Colonel Melville behaved with the utmost cou-= rage and gallantry. The English troops, • however, had many taken pisiSoners, and many wounded.. The above intrepid officer wrote (as may be Suppo-" fed) to Lord Richley, who was now fettino; out with his fair dauQ-hter to vi-fit sin estate in Ireland by way of a-musing her anxiety in the abfence of her lover. Colonel Melville wrote al-So to his friend Sir Henry. Bellmour, which epistle, as it contains a very interesting matter to his peace, I shall lay before the reader.
,, . E 2	L E Ih
1
lOO	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
i
f
L E T T E R IX.
.
COLONEL MELVILLE, TO SIR HENRY	il
BELLMOUR.
NHcad ^aricrSf Albany.^ Feb. i.
OW, indeed, my fnend, am I J doom’d to eternal wretchedneSs !—im> done for ever!—Yes, Bellmour, at length I find I have a Nnrf, and that, perhaps, the most SuScentible which ever felt the agonies of love. O that your kind—your friendly warning had arrived in time long before I left England 1—Long before 1—Ah! wretch that I am ! what would I fay.? am I not betrothed—engaged to Lady Charlotte Richley ?—Am I not tied in bonds of filial gratitude to her worthy parent, which never—ttever can be broken, to be hers—and hers alone.?
O my beloved friend, how do I long to repofe my griefs in thy faithful
breast—
A LESSON FOR LoVERS.	101
breast—the Seat of tender confidence and manly virtue !—But will you yet, my worthy Bellmour, after this JJoame-ful confefijon,—will you yet, allow me to dwell a few minutes on the fatal Subject that has ruined my peace of mind for ever ?—Believe me my miSe-ry originates from the Sudden effects of a furprife, which—not even thy tried philoSophy could resist.—^Hear then my unfortunate tale, and pity— but do not condemn,—I will be jufl—I will be true to the merit of Lady Charlotte.—But ah! I feel I can never love any woman but the divine Fanny Sidney.
You will grant me, I trust, Some moments attention, whilst I acquaint you with a few interesting particulars.
Not many days after the last very Severe engagement with the rebellious Amencans (of which 1 imagine the Gazzette has been full) as I was sitting one evening iii my tent, my aid-de-E 3	camp
102	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
camp came to me in haSiie, and Said he had a most Singular affair to impart : the circumstances of which were, that a beautiful young lady, about Seventeen, was waiting without the lines, begging my aid and afiistance to Suffer her by a note to the general officer to paSs into the enemy’s camp, in order to attend her dying father, a British captain, who is among the number of the prifoners, and wounded mortally.
I was Struck, I confefs, with the Sin-giilanty of the request!—“My God! (faid I to the officer who informed me of this) does she confider the extreme danger of resigning herfeif (a beautiful young creature, as you deScribe her to be) into the hands of a defperate and cruel enemy ?—and that too at almost the hour of midnight!—Who is herfather.^”
I was anSwered, he was the brave Captain Sidney, who behaved fo gallantly at Rhode-ISland.
“ How
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	lO^
“ How great,” Said I, “ must be the resolution of this girl!—tender—young —and delicate !”—It appeared to me almost an effort above human nature.
“ I find,” Said my aid-de-camp, ‘‘ this lovely creature came with her father from England, and has attended his fortunes thiteughout his campaign, which has bjeen tedious and perilous.
i
'Tdiey were long stationed^ at Halifax, and in many dtlier parts.—What will you do ?” continued he ; She appears almost exhausted for'want of rest and food, and has been drenched in rains above thefe last twelve hours.”
‘‘ Good Heavens !” Said I, “ what can be done ?—carry her a cup of whie, and Something to eatthen Snatching up my pen, I wrote three lines to recommend her to the protection of the general officer.
This singular affair, I must confefs, dwelt Strongly on my mind, and I siept that night but little.—The next day I E 4	was
104	^ LESSON FOR LOvERS.
was unavoidably obliged to viSit a prifo- | ner in the barracks, who had difpatches for me of the ntmoft importance.. In ^ this very recepticle for the wounded, it feems the brave Captain Sidney had been confined; but good Heavens! what was my astonishment, when, in pashng by a wretched hole (chamber it could not be called) I Saw a number of Soldiers, of the rebel Side, endeavouring to tear away from the body of a man just dead, the loveliest creature my eyes ever beheld ! She Screamed—ilie clung to the body as if her own death alone should Separate her from it.—At fight of me she loudly exclaimed, with inimitable pashon and perfuafion,—
“ O Sir! for God’s fake—Save me— Save me from thefe bad men—they would part me ctom my dearest father?” still clinging to the body.
Oh, Bellmour ! it is not in language —it is not in the power of the warmest fancy to expreSs the peculiar beauties
of
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	I05
of this enchanting girl--—Again She Screamed to me for aid and protection. —I was wonderfully affected.—I desired the Soldiers to quit her, who, however, were not offering rudeneSs to her perSon, Save in the action of parting her from the corpSe.
“ Every attention—every care,” 'Said I, “ madam, shall be extended to tlie relics of the worthy officer your good father.”
You will pleaSe here, my friend, to' obServe, I had learnt the deceaSed was the brave Captain before-mentioned.
“ I muft befeech you,” continued 1, not to remain a moment longer in this dreadful place :—your	Safe-
ty is concerned for Heaven’s Sake be
perSuaded.”------But I found it in
vain to expostvilate.; she was almoSt frantic ;—raving with grief.
“ You must be removed (continued I to this beautiful girl.—Ah! how Superlatively lovely in her tears and E 5	heart-
\
Io6	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
heart-moving diSorder!)—you must this	j
moment be removed to Some place of Safety”
“ Hah! (Said She, staring wildly in my face, her poor head beginning to turn) are you not my brother Frederic ?—Yes—yeS’—yes—let us bury— let us bury him.”—(pointing to her father) “ I thought, my Frederic, you had been killed at Rhodc-Istand.”
I had two friends with me—and as it was impofiible to Suppofe common humanity could admit of this poor destitute girl remaining longer in Such a Scene of confusion, I caught her up at once in my arms, leaving one of my companions to take care of the dead body, and to fee it decently interred, whilst the other asiisted in carrying off our precious burthen, who had Siinted in my arms. Never, Surely, was there, as at that moment, So moving—So foitl-harrowing an object !■—her fine hair totally dishevelled, and hanging careleSsly ^	* on
A LESSON FOR tOVERS.	I07
on her bare lovely bofom;—her face —but-------
Oh Ihe was more than language can exprefs,
“ Or youthful poets fancy when they love.”
Her head, all the time I was conveying her to my tent (for which I had previously afked permistion of the Ame-ncan general) was reclined on my bo» Som—and flie remained, during my walk, which was about a quarter of a mile, in a strong fainting fit.
When I arrived at my tent, I cauSed her to be conveyed into the most retired part of it; where, 'with water, drops. See. she at last came So much to herfelf as to open her charming eyes.—^W^c laid her gently on a couch.
“ Softly, gentlemen,” Said I, on two or three of my companions endeavour* ing to ashst in recovering her.—‘‘ Softly, we must not hurry her fo.”
Methought, though their intentions was purely kind, I could not bear any one to approach her but myfelf,—much
kSs
Io8	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
leSs to touch her hand, or endeavour to assist.—Ah, Bellmour I how rapid— how instantaneous is the real passion of love!—I defy, however, any young fellow, in niy Situation, to behold Such an object as MiSs Sidney without emotion. She continued rambling in her head the chief part of the day ; Sometimes calling me her father—Sometimes her brother Frederic :—her voice— her manner irreflflihle. Once She Softly whiSpered me,—“ Where have you buried him —donst let the rebels know where you have laid him—keep that a profound Secret—they will tear his poor wounded body out of the grave— and then”—(Shrieking) again She fell into fits.
My Surgeon to the regiment having bled her. She began gradually to. recover her fenfes.—I paSs over her affecting lamentations ; indeed they were Such as would have melted any heart SuSceptible of the least compassion. I
conjured
A LESSON FOR LOVERS,	IO9
conjured the enchanting girl to be compofed—and to repofe Some trust in me.—That I had known and re-fpected her worthy parent, and that I would now be father—brother—fnend to her for ever:—ah, my Henry!—my tongue faultered, when it was almost going to pronounce, hufoand.^ though my heart most vehemently desired to give her that affurance.
The lovely girl was placed in a kind of little room or clofet, at the back of my tent, where I had occasionally kept my books, Sec,-—She had now been in this affylum three days, during which time I was devising a hundred Schemes how to place her in Safety with Some honourable fnend.
“ My God!’’ Said I, ‘‘ what or where can I bestow her.^”
I will not conceal from you', my fnend, that I found a passion, violent as tender, growing in my heart every moment for this fair unfortunate.—Indeed
110	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
deed every hour I discovered Some new perfection. O Harry! had you Seen her delicate confuflon—her modest timidity, when She found She was in the hands of a stranger—though treated with the utmost delicacy and honour— I fay, could you have Seen her diftrefs on this occasion, you could not—would not wonder that I adore her to distraction. A thouSand—and a thouSand times at this period I endeavoured to recollect the merit—the accomplishments of Lady Charlotte—my indifpensible obligations of gratitude to her moSt worthy father; —but, alas! alas! my	cooly told
me, there I had fixed my faith and honour., whilst my heart could acknowledge no other Sovereign than the adorable Fanny Sidney.—Allow me, however, this Small merit I befeech you, Bellmour, that in the beginning of this most violent affection I felt gainino; ground eve-
^	^	o	o o
ry hour, I had strength of refolution Susheient to come to a determination
of
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	Ill
of Sending her to Some English ladies, wives of Some of our general officers in camp, who were Soon, I understood, to Set out for England.—-This, I thought, would be a Safe and proper means, by placing her under their care and protection, of getting her Safely conveyed to England, where I was determined to provide for her for life.—After much consideration, a thought occurred to me of'writing a letter to my old fnen'd, Mrs. NelSon (widow of my worthy tutor) who has a houSe in a Sweet retired Situation near Bath, definng her to take the care of Mifs Sidney as a boarder, &c. acquainting herj you will fuppofe, with the very singular incident of her 'falling into my hands.
You will, perhaps, heVe wonder, my friend, that I should talk of providing for this young lady for life., when posh bly she might have relations in England in affluence, who would most likei-ly gladly receive her ; but alas! I found
she
'(
I 12	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
She had none. I had gathered by little j recitals from the lovely girl—for I would not give her the pain of recounting her little history at large, as I found it had been distrefsful—I had gathered,
I fay, that she had no furviving relations in England ; that her father, mother, with herfelf, at the early age of eleven, had been in Amenca; Captain Sidney, before the breaking out of the Amencan war, being stationed in Nova Scotia ; that she had lost a brother, a gallant young officer, in the dreadful affair at Rhode Istand ; that having lost her mother, she had lived till the last twelvemonths in a very retired part of North America, with a relation of her father’s;—that since the death of the above lady, she had attended her father through many hardships, as his health, being but very indi-fFerent, made her tender cares for him neceffiiry ;—and that during our late adion with the
Americans,
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	11 g
Americans, and Since, she had Suffered extremely.
On finding the amiable maid had no connections in this part of the world, I judged it most adviSable to forward my Scheme of fending her to England : and this I communicated to my lovely charge.
Ah, Eellmour! had you Seen the Soft blufh which dyed her languid cheek,—-the tender confufion which at once Seized her when I mentioned her removal— you would at that inStant, my friend, have thought, as I did, that your almost dif-tracted Melville was not wholly indifferent to the young heart of this Sweet girl.—There is a wonderful Simplicity —an enchanting innocence in her manner, which may be eafiiy accounted for, bred, as she has been, in almoft the wilds of'America, and wholly unac' quainted with the common forms of unmeaning stattcry, and all that Specious kind of fiilfe nonfenfc vvliich paf-
fes
I 14	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
fes under the name of politenefsx—she is, in short, ftmplicity itfelf,, void of the ] least particle of art.—A proof of this ■ appeared when I propofed my Scheme of her leaving America.
O Sir 1 (bursting into tears) do you then renounce me ?—I shall never fee you more!—I could wish, methinks, to fee you once again, to thank you for your kind care of me in my distrefs.”
I affured her it was by no means my intention to renoimct her. I then informed her of my whole deSign of Supporting her in England—at the fame time hinting that, according to the received customs, and forms of life, I could not, with	let her remain
in my tent.-—She took the hint., and here her delicacy was as great as her gratitude :—the former made her fee the ncceflity of her removal;—the latter impelled her to throw herfelf at my feet:—she caught my hand, and bedewed it with her tears.—-My God !
what
A LESSON..^OR LOVERS.	II5
what were the agonies of my boSom at that moment!—I Suffered her to remain a few minutes (hardly knowing that I did So) in that Soul-moving attitude ;—and, after placing her in her chair, begged her not to over-rate a common act of friendship.—‘‘ Mrs. NelSon,” added I, “ you will find, Madam, a worthy woman ;—she will love you as her own child. I will write to her inffantly ;—which letter you will convey to her, and by which you will fee the footing you will be on with that good lady.”—Saying which I then fat down to my deSk and wrote the following lines, and directed them to Mrs. Nelfon, at West-Green, near Bath.
Camp., Albany, America,
My worthy friend,
THE many instances of your readi-nefs to ferve and oblige me, both before, and since tlic death of your excellent
Il6	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
cellent hnfband, my ever honoured ti> tor, renders an apology for what I am j going to propofe to you, I trust, unne-ceffary.—But to come to the point at once.
“ By an unfortunate incident, occa-fioned by the fatal chances of war, the bearer of this letter, Mifs Sidney, fell under my protection. H'he merit— the bravery of her gallant father, who died in the fervice of his king and country, entitle her to the utmost re-fpect, and I am determined to Support and provide for her helpleSs innocence. —^She has no friend in this part of the globe to whom I could commit her in charge;—and her connections in Eng-land have likewiSe been long diffolved. Will you, therefore, my good Mrs. NelSon, take the trust of receiving under your roof this very amiable and distreffed young lady ?—Her age, barely Seventeen—her perSon uncommonly fine,—make it neceffary she should be
carefully
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	Iiy
carefully preServed from the arts of a treacherous world. With whom, then, my worthy friend, can I deposit this valuable charge fo properly as with yourSelf.^—You will form her heart, which Seems good, to virtue, and to. happineSs.—You will gently lead and guide this poor unhappy orphan to peace and comfort. Her underftattding,
I find, has been extremely well culti* vated, and she has read a great deal.— For thesis advantages she is obliged to a worthy friend, since dead, in this part of the world.—You will, however, my dear Madam, find her masters in the genteel accomplishments of music, dancing. Sec, of which, I imagine, she is totally at prefent unacquainted :—in short, I beg you would look on her as your own child; and as Such educate and instruct her in what you think befitting.—Poshbly, when her poor father’s affairs are fettled, Something handSome of property, may be coming to her;—
if
Il8	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
if nor, T Shall annually provide for her, 'and t r . fe of her in marriage to Some ' wortiiy man. i purpoSe, for the pre-fent, giving you a hundred guineas/er annum for the board and care of this young unfortunate, and I flatter my-felf you will find her no difagreeahk ac-c[UiSition.—Heaven is my witnefs (1 trust you know my heart too well to disbelieve me) I have no Sinister view in this.
^—The world—the prying, wife world, you know, is often apt to be cenSonous in what it cannot comprehend ; and I ' have known many an astion termed a vice, 'merely from its not being under-Jiood as a virtue, and judging by narroiv minded conceptions only.—You will, therefore, dear Mrs. Nelfoii, be particularly cautious of naming me, in this matter as the friend of Mifs Sidney, as it may poilibly hurt her future life in . fettling, delicately as She is circumStan-ced.—I need Say no more on this head to one of your known prudence and
knowledge
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	II9
knowledge of the world, your own dif-' cretion will be Sufficient to direct you.
“ Some ladies of known reputation and credit, who are coming to Eiigland, will convey your fair charge Safe to your hands.—How long She may re- ^ main with you is uncertain :—it is more than probable that I fhall enter into matrimony with a lady of great family in England Soon after my return, and perhaps then MiSs Sidney may reSidc with us.
Adieu, my very dear friend, all Suc-cefs and happinefs attend you with your new gueSt. Be affured, whatever expenSe, more than I have mentioned, may be incurred on her account, will be moSt gladly re-imburSed, and all favours acknowledged by,
' Good Madam,
Your very sincere	/
and faithful friend,
•	CHARLES MELVILLE.
This
120	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
This letter having finiflied, I presented it to my shir ward to read.—I purpoSely mentioned to Mrs. NelSon my future marriage., not only that it might preclude her imagining I had any designs upon this young Lady of that Sort my Self, but that by this method Mifs Sidney would See (when she read the letter) what I much wished | her to know, that I was an engaged man. 1 —The Subject was too delicate for me | to enter on alone,—and my motives for this enchanting girl to know the \ above utihappy anecdote-—(Ah, my j fnend, do I live to call it an unhappy	j
one ?)—my motives, I repeat, were	]
not ungenerous.—Her peace, I find, is j too dear to me, to Suffer Iier one mo- I merit to be tortured with the pangs of an hopeleSs affection.—She might poS- ‘ sibly imagine the few favours I intended to bcStow on her, together with sthoSe I had shewn already, might pro- | ceed from a motive more tender than
common
A LESSON FOR LOVERS;	I2I
common friendjhip;—and I was the more desirous to give her Some hint of my enthralled State, with regard to a lady in England, becauSe truly Bell-mour (vanity apart) I had obferved many—many marks of a beginning ten-derneSs in the bofom of this dear girl for your poor friend.—Alas! She has no arts—not one little trick of the Sex, which So often, when they would conceal a pasiion, they can put on.—The enchanting Fanny—all truth and heavenly innocence, an hundred times betrayed her Soft confusion at my approach —her rising bluSh—and evident diSor-der, on my accidentally touching her lovely hand.—But let me haSten to quit the Subject, which I fhall inftantly do, when I have informed you the ladies who are Setting out for England (among whom is the worthy Mrs. Mill-wood you have heard me mention, and her daughter of the age of my fair charge, and who will be a proper com-voL. I,	F	panion
122	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
panion to her on the voyage) all of the whole party, in fine, exprefSed their affurances, and with pleaSure, that they would have her Safely conveyed to the houSe of Mrs. NelSon, as Soon as pofii-ble after their arrival in England.
At length, yesterday morning, I conveyed this most charming girl to the above ladies.—What Ifuffered in * parting with her, beggars all deScription; —O virtue, virtue, may thy rewards in a future (late (as I doubt not they will) fully compensate for thy trials in this I ^On the morning of our parting, my
s.
I
That Colonel jMelville v/as a hero in the field, we doubt not; but we will be bold to fay, that the exalted action of refigning up Mifs Sidney, in the noble manner he did, with the whole of his honourable behaviour to that unfortunate young lady, places him in a Shining light, infinitely beyond all the Caefars, Alexanders, and Anthonys that ever existed, with all their Roman cars of triumph, and poeans of vitstory. So true is it,
“ One felf-afprovhig acl whole years outweighs, y Of worid’y lionours, and of loud huzzas.”
Sweet
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	123
Sweet Fanny—my Fanny!—Ah, Lady Charlotte, forgive thy wretched Mel-vUle !—'But to proceed—Mifs Sidney, the morning of our departure, almost fainted in my arms, as I lifted her into the carriage to convey her from the tentthen bursting into tears, witte Sweet fimplicity, fhe begged I would keep for her Sake a string of Americail Wampum (she had collected in her travels) with Some very beautiSul shells— this simple prefent I prefer to all the gems in the world ;—ah, Bellmour, had you feen the look which accompanied this gift!—her expreshve eyes—shining with love and gratitude !—Oh dif-tractionl^—I must fly from the cruel Subject.
Ever, ever yours, the wretched ' _ .	melvilL«-*
Fz	LET-
124	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
LETTER X.'
SIR HENRY	BELLMOUR TO	COLONEL	’
MELVILLE.	j|
I ■:
London.	;a
X ITY thee I	my noble-minded friend!	j
—^Indeed I do most heartily:—and yet,	|
I know not, that trials like thine, which \ call forth the most exalted honour, | and the most refined virtues, can be looked^ on as Subjects for regret. Thou | excellent young man! teach me to imi- | tate thy worth.—I have been drawing i a parallel betwixt the great Scipio, of j ancient fame, and yourfelf;—but you,	|
-—you, my Melville, upon investigating your different trials, infinitely exceed him in heroiSm : the fair lady he loved was betrothed to a favoured lover, consequently she could make no return of affection to the amorous Scipio :— but you, my friend, discovered a nrSt
beginning '
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	125
beginning paflion in the^ breast of this lovely girl, which few—very few young fellows, let me Say, of this age, but would have taken an advantage of.— Singular, certainly, is your trial;—lingular is, indeed, your virtue.—I cannot recollect, in any of our Sentimental novels, a distrefs like thine, and almost wish it could be made public, for the lake of all the modern young men of fashion.
My dear Charles, it will give you. pleafure to hear that your fair ward is Safely arrived at the peaceful manlion of the good Mrs. Nelfon. I have been lately at Bath, and could not help, for thy fake, calling to fee how matters went on at West Green. I faw Mifs Sidney, and think she is a most lovely girl.—Mrs. Nelfon is delighted with her, and, above all things, is charmed with her limplicity, lincenty, and her entire ignorance of what is called fajhiomble politenefs.
F 3	The
126	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
The latter, your good old friend tells me, is as praiSe-worthy as it is extraordinary. Mrs. Nelfon, who is visited and much reSpected by Several families of distinction near her, cannot make the amiable girl comprehend why people who are called “ vastly good—the bejl people in the world, Sec.” siiould continually, as the Sweet girl obServes,yhy what they do not mean. One lady tells - another, fhe would die to Serve her, yet whispers to a third, I wiSh that horrid woman was out of my houSc.”^— Another careffes her friend with every term of the fondest attachment; but, no Sooner is She departed, than - llie laughs with derision at liter every word and action. “ How is this, Mrs. Nelfon ?” fays the good Mifs Sidney;
pray tell me.”
You will easily conceive how much the worthy woman is delighted with the Sweet simplicity and artlefs questions of her young cliarge i—-So different
' I
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	127
rent from the affected, pert, boki things who infeji every quarter of both the town and country. And yet, with all this beautiful innocence, your old friend tells me, fhe possSeffes an uncommon strength of understanding; and has read (whilst under the tuition of that Amencan lady you mentioned) most of ourbeSt authors in history, poetry, divh nity, and other uSeful parts of literature. The ladies who brought her to England, were careful of their charge; and Mifs Millwood, whom I am acquainted with, was So delighted with her amiable fellow-traveller, that they have entered into a correspondence by letters.
I greatly applaud your delicate method of acquainting this lovely girl (in your letter to Mrs. NelSon) that you are (as you call yourSelf) an engaged man t it was generous, my friend—^it was noble.—It is, indeed, more than probable that She might entertain,—or at least .	F 4	be
128	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	I
be furpnfed—(from your extreme an I tention to her, not to fay one word of I your perSon, &c.)^—She might, I repeat,	I
have been furprifed into the pallion of I love.-----lam this instant interrupted. I
I have juft heard another astion has I happened near you, more Severe than I the last :—pray Heaven you are Safe !
—A gentleman has told me you are , among the number of the wounded:
—though, he hears, but stightly So.—^I	*
4ong for particulars.
Earl Richley has been (as I SuppoSe you know by his letters) fome rime with his fair daughter, at an eftate of his Lordfliip’s in Ireland, on the account of changing the air for her health, which I hear is but	very indifferent.	I
With the	utmost reluctance I am	i
obliged to conclude, as I have, at pre- r Lent, no leSs than two families in my houfe out of the north ;—a perfect I inundation of country couSins,	maiden-	1
aunts,	*
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	129
aunts, See. &c.—theSe good folks, I am obliged to fquire about from morning till night. Don’t be furpriSed if I tell you in my next, that my little black-eyed couSin Patty has almost made me fay, with Benedict in the comedy, “ when I Said I Should die an old bat-chelor, I did not know I Should Hve to be married,”—	,
i Adieu, my excellent Melville : may Heaven preferve you.-—I hope the report of your wound is falSe.—Believe me,	1
MoSt faithfully yours,
HENRY BELLMOUR,
LETTER XI.
MISS SIDNEY, TO MISS- MILLWOOD.
WVFeJl Green.
HY, my amiable friend, will you again infiji on knowing the eaufe of that Secret gnef you fay you are convinced F 5	~	has
150	A tESSON FOR LOVERS.
has taken poffestlon of my mind, when I have So often declared that, Surely, the death of a beloved father, and of an amiable brother, are cauSes Sufficient to call forth thoSe grievous Sighs you mention, and account for that habitual fadneSs which you fay feems to have taken poSTeffion of my foul.
My Situation, which-yon fo kindly enquire after, is beyond any thing in this world I could have imagined agree* able. The incomparable Mrs. Nelfon is not only the tender r^Dther but a most inJiruIiive friend.—-Indeed, my Emma, I stood in need of fuch an one. A perfect wild American, just caught from her native woods, or a young Hottentot found in a Solitary cave, could hardly be more unknowing of the prefent fafiions and ways of the world than your poor Fanny.
You have heard me often defcribe my rural residence, in one of the most Solitary Spots of Nova Scotia. Hid
from
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	I'3-I
from the world—encompaSFed by the vaSt woods, of which that country a-bounds, I Saw—I knew nothing but what my books told me.—-The worthy woman with whom I dwelt,—and a few Indians, who inhabited a tract of land not far from our abode (with whofa simple life I was charmed) were the only human beings I ever converSed with, from the age of eleven till sixteen ;—when my dear parent took me from my Solitude,—^and whofe fortunes, I was determined to attend.	^
Never fhall I forget the piercing cries of the poor Indians, when I had by signs informed them I was going to> leave them for ever. They called my departure a journey beyond the great mountain I an idea which conveys to theSe poor people an immeasurable distance. This tribe of Indians, are the moSt simple-minded, inoffensive ^and industrious of any in North Amenca.. Why they were So particularly attacL
eel:
15*	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	I
ed to me (if I may make uSe of that ex^	I
preflion) was merely from a principle I of gratitude; a virtue, I afflire you, I thoSe innocent people poSTeSs in a very I strong degree.—I had frequently taught	I
them the ufe of	Some medicinal	B
herbs, a knowledge I had acquired R from the good old friend I lived with, a and whom they regarded almoSi: to ado- . B ration, believing her to be a female ma- B gician, fhe having	performed fome	B
wonderful cures in inflammatory cafes, by the aid of Dr. James’s valuable	■
powders, on a few of their women and	I
children.	H
I taught Several of their young maids | to uSe the needle ;—and endeavoured	|
to give fome of the elders a notion of ' I a Deity, by pointing to the Su/i,—the	I
moon, Sec.—as made by the poSver that	|
I adored. On theSe occasions, the	I
awful filence thoSe poor wretches ob?*	I
Served was	truly affecting;—and I am	I
convinced,	if	proper	instruction was	I
given	S
S
-	1
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	133
given them, much might be done in this ' very important article.
I had occasionally conferred on them little tnsting favours in bestowing certain trinkets and ribbons I had belonging to me.^—With theSe they would adorn their arms, and look upon me with a fort of enthusiastic gratitude.
I am fully perfuaded we too rashly judge the Indian notions, when we indiscriminately Say, they are all cruel, revengeful, barbarous, &c.
Their wars, it is true, are conducted with a degree of ferocity confined alone to uncivilized nations. Trained in the belief that the destruction of their enemies is just, and acting generally on the principles of defence and felf-preServation, in what do they differ, in theSe reSpects, from the more polished Europeans, but that the man-ner.. of fighting their battles is not So Systematical Their method of treating fame of their unfortunate captives-,
whom
134	LESSON FOR LOVERS.
whom they put to cruel deaths, is indeed highly blaniable ; but then we ought to make Some allowance for the force of habits and customs. Towards others of their vanquished, they extend a benevolence no where elfe to be met with. The widows and relations of thoSe who have the misfortune to fall in battle, frequently adept Such captives as strike their fancy, to Supply the place of the deceafed ; and the community fix on others to live among them as friends and brethren. With the white men, who uSe them w'eil, they live in,
. . stiendship, are fond of doing them Services, and will even attend them as domestics, when not engaged in hunting parties, or other occupations oS their own.
Let us not judge then of their com duct, till we are better acquainted with, their motives, and Springs of action. Their reaSon, certainly, is obScured,. but their principles are innocent: their
pastions.
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	I35
pastlons may be excefiive, but they are not corrupt.
Ah, my dear friend! how much to be preferred is one of thefe wild In* dians, with all his honest roughnefs, to the Smooth, the refined European villain, who boasts of his politeneSs, whilst he is cutting his neighbours throat,, in whofe face he deceitfully Smiles ; or Secretly planning the destruction oS that friend, whom he prophanely calls by that Sacred title, and whom he invites and careffes at his table! if this be refinement and politeneSs, give me the Savage den, with liberty, faith and friendfhip for my companions, and I would forgo the gilded palace, and all the artificial acquirements of the polished world.
How would my Emma, who is So fond of Scenes of nature, have been delighted with the rural stmplicity of thefe Indians near whom I dwelt! The vUlage, if I may So term it, was
Situated
136	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
Situated by a pleafant stream, which, iffuing from'a rock, ran through a ver dant valley into ai large lake, in which were numbers of beautiful little iSlands, arrayed with greenest herbage, or ena> melled with Sweet-Scented flowers.
The village (of huts) is of a circular form, and bounded on one fide by a vast foreSt; on the other, by Surrounding craggy rocks. The walls of the cottages are compofed of green turf, with branches of trees interwoven ; and the roofs are covered with reeds artificially plaited and withered leaves. Every thing is in the most fimple state imaginable : no domes—no pompous pillars —no different orders of architecture to decorate the buildings, but all is rude as wTre the habitations of the antediluvian world.
The young men of this nation follow the chace.—Their principal bufineSs Seems to be to provide food for the whole community (they having every
tiling
r- ,
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	137
thing in common) or to defend them from the hostile attacks of their enemies. The women remain at the village, and have a variety of occupations fuited to their age and condition. Besides the care of their children they are ingenious in preparing the bark or rliind of Some odoriferous trees, with which they weave curious strings and girdles,—whilst others prepare belts of wampum.'—Thefe, according as the colours are variousty mixed, ferve as tokens of friendihip to their kindred, or to allies of their Several tribes. Their little ones are early inured to labour, to danger, and fatigue.—It is incredible at what an early age they are taught to handle the bow, the oar, the tomahawk and the javelin. When one of their wansiors returns viBorious.^ the v/hole village is one continual Scene of feStivity and mirth. Both young and old mingle in the dance, and
record
\
133	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
record the wansior’s exploits in Songs of joy.
As thefe fimple people have no par-' ticular property, they are untainted with the love of wealth, that bane to Social felicity ; and as they polTeSs every thing in common, they know not the pangs of avarice, nor the fears of poverty. Temperate and inured to labour, they are brave, adlive, and vigorous. 'I'heir affections devoid of pedantic formality, are ardent and unaffected. They expreSs their emotions with all the freedom and simplicity of nature. Their joy is rapturous, and their Sorrow vehement. Oii my departure, they Set up a kind of 'wailing Song, gave me belts of wampum, shells from the rocks, and coral of beautiful colours, and hung on my garments :—■ and whilst Some were recommending me to the great fpirk that governs the 'zuhirkvind (for So they style their God) others followed me, in Sorrowfful silence,
to.
A-LESS0:S FOR LOVFRS.	139
to die edge of the mountains,—I was wonderfully affected.—So much for thcSe Simple Indians.
^ I hear there has been a Sharp engagement with the British and American troops,—yiy gratittcde to my noble preferver, makes me anxious for his Siifety----Heaven guard him from danger—is my hourly prayer---------Alas ! I
fear he may have fallen—if not in llauphter—into the hands of our cruel enemies.
Mrs. NelSon, my worthy friend, my guide, and my inStructrcfs, is in the greatest esteem among fome very genteel families in this neighbourhood but, my dear, to you I fay in confidence, not one of thefe very genteel people have I feen, who appear to me to poffefs that great virtue called fince-rhy^ I have been at times almost Iliocked at the apparent difiimulation of people who have profeffed the utmost affecstion to Serve each other.
Why
140	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
“ Why do theSe people still continue to vifit’' Say I to Mrs. NelSon, if they So Secretly contemn and de-Spife each other—would a Savage Indian do this } Ah ! no*—no.’'
My good fnend Smiles at my Simplicity.
“ You are now in the world, Mifs Sidney,’^ Says She, “ and are happy that you can fee through this Species of falsehood.”
« Aye—-this world!” thought L To-morrow we go to Spend the day with a lady of extraordinary character for charity, piety, and all other virtues;—I will give you an account of this visit in my next:—mean time I SubScisibe myfelf, with the -plain fmcerity of a Wild Indian,
Your faithful friend,
FANNY SIDNEY,
^	'	LET-
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	I4I
LETTER XII.
THE SAME TO THE SAME.
IWeJi Green.
AM now going, my dear Emma, to fulfill my promiSe, of giving you an account of our vifit to Lady Grace * * *.
I was much prejudiced in favour of this Lady from the character I had frec[uent-ly heard of her in company. Mrs. Nel-fon and I were conducted into a room where Several gentlemen and ladies were affembled. The latter-.^ after fixing their*'eyes on me (for what caiiSe I cannot conceive) fell into a kind of whiSper, in which the lady of the houSe joined, and I thought Seemed to eye me with very particular observation, 1 was extremely abafhed, and hardly knew what to do to avoid her eyes. I was, however. Somewhat relieved, by her attention to me being called off
on
142	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
on the arrival of a perSon who had brought her a paper of Some public charity to be fubfcribeel for.—She look-^ ed it over.
“ Let me fee what Lady B-------and
Lord S------fubfcnbe.—Put me down
ten pounds more than they:—heftWe put my name down:—the last time you forgot/’
“ Charming Lady Grace (exclaimed Several of the gentlemen)—what a noble foul you poffeSs!”
This lady, I Should fay, has an estate of about five thoufand a-year, and an
immenfe Sum in the funds.--------She
is turned of fifty—with a perSon remarkably plain, and, I think, Something in her manner forbidding.
Three gentlemen who live constantly in the houSe with this chantable lady, drank tea with us.—One of them is her ladyShip’s domestic chaplain; the other two She ufually retains in her
family,
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	I43
family, for Some reafons I could not <5 very well understand.
One of theSegentlemen began, ‘‘Pray have^you heard, Madam (addrefiing -himSelf to Lady Grace), that MiSs .
p------ is grown remarkably fat of late,
and is gone into the country?”
“ Indeed! (Said her ladyship, her eyes Sparkling with pleaSure) well— this is news I—My God !—what will this world come to ?”—casting up her eyes, and raising her shoulders.
I could not, for my part, conceive how a young perSon growing fat, and taking a journey into the country, could be construed into cenSiU'e.
“ But above all,” Said her Ladyship’s chaplain, “ my indignation is raiSed against the baronet at the Abbey—and Xhdityoung creature he is going to marry.—A mere child!—Pye,—fye,—-a man of his age !—it shews a wanton hankering after the vanities and plea-
Sure.s
144	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
^	. fures of this world unbecoming his
years.’’
“ Nay (Said the lady of the houSe) they ought to have been married Some months since, I hear.—But come let us go to -prayers (a custom I find in the fa^ inily never miffed) let us go to prayers.”
' Servants now came in with books and cufhions, and we all kneeled down. —The chaplain, who had been So freely Speaking of his neighbours, prayed moSt fervently and loudly, as did her I ladyship.	|
This Solemn office being finished, the conversation took the Same turn of Scandal as before, in which the two gentlemen (who live with her ladyship) bore a'great part. Novice, as I am, in the affairs of the world, I could however plainly See, that they were Speaking of characters (few of the company joining with them) that were by no means fit Subjeds for calumny.
When
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	I45
When we returned home, Mrs. Nel-fon afked me how I liked my viSit, and I plainly told her I was difappointed in the opinion I had formed of Lady Grace, and wished to know if she thought me wrong.
“ It does not become me,” returned the good woman, “ to Say what my thoughts are of that lady.—^I have obligations to her family:—her father was find to my poor Mr. Nelfon:—I therefore can fay nothing more than that the world Speaks highly of her.”
This was all I could get from my friend.—But, alas, my dear, I foon Saw a worthy old clergyman in this neighbourhood, who fully explained her character.
“ My good child,” Said this venerable man, “ you are young—but ob-Serve, in your future life, all is not goM that gliftens.—I have no prejudice a-gainst this lady—but the real fact is, her motive for charity is ojlentation.—^
VOL. I.	G	Under
146	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
Under the cloak of religion, fhe practises the most voluptuous vices. She commonly retains two or three visitants in her family (besides her charitable chaplain) whom the world is to look upon as objects of her extreme benevolence and greatnefs of Soul; but in fact, theSe wretched men are kept for the purpoSe of gratifying her love of detraction, by picking up, and retailing to her, Scandalous tales of her neighbours ;—if, for other reaSons," She must anSwer for it:—the world, site fancies, can Say nothing of So pious—So charitable a perSon.—But, alas ! alas ! fuch pretensions to religion is, and must be highly offensive to that Being, who fees the heart. There are,” added he, “ too many of this character, who conceal their baSe hypocriSy under the majh of religion^'
“ Heavens !” Said I astonished, “ is it possible
Verv
✓
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	I47
Very certain,” replied the good man, “ but thefe characters are So apt to deceive by their fpecious appearance, that So young and inexperienced a per-Son as yourSelf ought to be Set right.— There are Some few, and but a few, however, who See the real malignity, envy, and other vices of the heart of Lady Grace. Her riches proteB her from general cenSure ; for the world, though it affeBs to Speak of money with contempt, is, and ever will be, attracted to its owners, and will bow down before its fhrine.”
Ah! my dear MiSs Millwood, where do we find vices like theSc among even the wildest of the Indian tribes —If this is to be refined, may my abode be with the wild beasts of the deSart, on the banks of the lake Ontario!
Forgive this dull letter :—my Spirits are low, an habitual SadneSs Seems to prey on my heart.—-What is this / G 2
148	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
world that we poor deluded mortals make Such a coil about I
When I consider life, ’tis all a cheat,
Yet, fool’d with hope., we favour the deceit;
Truss on, and think to-morrow will repay. To-morrow’s falfer than the former day:
Lies worfe: and while it fays we Shall be bless.
With Some new joys, cuts off what we poffess.
Strange cozenage I none would live pass years again. Yet all hope pleal'ure from what yet remain.”
Thus it is, and ever will be while life' continues.—But a truce with reflection, as you will, I fear, think this epistle too long already; I will, therefore, not add another w^ord, but that I am.
Most truly yours,
FANNY SIDNEY,
LETTER XIIL
MISS MILLWOOD TO MISS SIDNEY%
N	Oakley Lodge, Monday.
OTHING but the actual fight of my dear and amiable Fanny, could have given me more pleaSure than her last
very
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	I49
very agreeable letters, and nothing could have prevented me from thanking her for them before, but having been to town to make preparations for a wedding.—^Not for my own wedding mv dear, obServe that.—^There is Some difference, you will Say, in being a bride, and a bridd.s-maid. The latter, I am very Shortly to be, to an old, and dear fnend, whom I believe you have often heard me mention:—a MiSs Patty Rivers, from the north of England ; who is just going to enter the state of matrimony with Sir Henry Bellmour, a very handfome, and, what is still better, a very worthy, good young gentleman. You would be delighted with my friend Patty—her character is purely fe-minhte:—timid and gentle to excefs:— fmall and delicate in her perfon, it Would Seem like downright cruelty to offend her in the least degree : one loves her at first-fight.^—^T'here is an inex-prestible foftneSs in her whole manner: G 3	—She
150	A LESSON FOR LOVERS,
—she Seems to intreat not to command, your esteem.—TheSe kind of mild characters (as Some elegant author observes, whoSe name I have forgot) are to the foul., what the mild green of a beautiful meadow is to the eye :—-you are not furprifed, but you feel an uu-fpeakable fatisfaBioti in the contemplation.—This little, artleSs Patty, who really appears like a girl of thirteen, though in fact she is nineteen, very Soon made a conquest of the agreeable Baronet, to the no Small SurpriSe, I fancy, oS her two elder listers, both line women, and profeffed beauties.—^Sir Henry has behaved most nobly, for as theSe three listers, though of an ancient good family, had but moderate for-•tunes, he has given Patty’s to her liS-I ters—and would not touch one shilling of it. There is, my Fanny, and al- i ways was to me Something in the divine quality oi generofty wonderfully attrac- i live.—It is more than justice,—-it is
more
,	1
]
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
more than charity ;—it is more than good faith ; in fad, it Seems an affem-blage of virtues blended.—Don’t you think So my dear ? *
You would have given me infinite pleaSure if you had told me your health had mended ; for though you will net owTi it, indeed, child, you are not well. —You have griefs, my Sweet girl,— and why will you not commit them to the bofom of friendfiip? If you will not Suffer me to jhare them, you make me but your friend by halves. Perhaps Some Americah chief, or Some Indian warrior may have made an iinpreflion, on your fufceptible heart.— I am half inclined to think the gentle youth belongs to Ih^ five nations., of which, you Speak with So particular a pleafure.— If you love your Emma, why not make her vour confidant ?
Poor Mifs Sidney, whofe very foul was opprefi fed by the extreme generofity of the amiable man flie loved, ealily alTented to this opinion of her fair friend.
G 4	lam
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
I am quite delighted with your juft and artleSs observations on the hiftncere manners of the age.—Capital vices may have been, perhaps, in former ages, as prevalent as at prefent; but I am apt to think the fawning infnceritf—the falfe politenefs we every day meet with, increases upon us daily.
I am interrupted—Some one knocks at my cloSet door :—it is my mother; —She enters, and looks over my Shoulder.
“ What, writing to our dear Fanny ? (yon know how She loves you my friend) give me the pen, Emma.^’— ** There it is, Madam.”
MrSm Millwood, in continuation,
MY good MiSs Sidney will permit an old woman to Scribble a few lines, who most Sincerely loves her :—and indeed, my dear child, had you not been com Signed to the worthy Mrs. Nelfon, you
never
%
A LESSON FOR LOVERS."	155
never Should have left your Emma, I affnre you.—Pray let us have your company at Oakley Lodge:—^your conversation will be as instructive as your letters. I read them over and ovew ' with frefh pleaSure. I agree perfectly in Sentiment with the worthy old clergyman you mention, concerning the hypocrify of this age, amongst all its other Shameful vices. There are, I fear, too many Lady Graces. The-more, my good child, you fee of this nation, the more will you be astonifli-cd at its want of virtue,—of firmneSs. Thofe people who paSs for what the world calls excellent—heansenly—^the hejl hearts in this world, 8cc.”—I Should be glad to know, upon investigation, in what ihEn' goodnefs conSists.—I am not here Speaking of Such an hypocrite as Lady Grace;—^nor of the fine, the‘eery fine folks of the ton (a term, if you remember, on our voyage, I explained to-you) but I am Speaking, of people of G 5	large
154	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
large fortunes, who reside on their own estates in the country, and who are reputed moft excellent—moji worthy.^ Sec, I am not glancing at any particular perSons, but at that kind of yery insipid character in general, of the astiu-ent, who, though they do not live in a state of Liter, yet I Should be glad to know what virtues they practife. It is true they do no hartn.^ but then they do no good. How many hundreds of theSe bejl people in the world live just in the following manner ?—Obferve I am not here Speaking of the vicious libertine part of tlie wo-rld, for I give that up as incorngible. To begin, then, with a good gentleman.
He rifes, perhaps, about Seven in the morning : if fond of dogs, takes a turn to his dog-kennel^—Breakfast, and looking over a number of^o/tete^/pamphlets, is his employment till eleven,—then is’ ordered his horSe, under pretence of' that very important article health;
but,
A LESSON FOR LOVERSi	JSS
but, in fact, the ride is to procure a voracious appetite for his dinner; where a table is provided in the highest style of modern gluttony. W^e will fuppofe _ Some company dine with this good man, whom he cares no more for than they do for him.—After a most unconfciom * able meal of Soups, ragouts, fricaffees to the number of twenty dishesr (enough for the Support of ten poor families for a whole month) the lady of the mansion, his. wife, retired from table (who is likewifeone of th.c^Q good people before-mentioned) I proceed with faying the hulbaaid and his company, after sitting over their wine for two hours, fettling, the'affairs of nations, wdiicli never will be fettled, at length Saunter to the gardens;—or if the weather will not permit, sit down in the 'drawing-room to Sober whist, or "qua- . drUle with the ladies.r—At length, the hour of Supper arrives, which is duly honoured.—Two, hours are Spent afterwards
%
15^	A 1E8S0N FOR LOVERS.
terw^ds in mere chit-chat,—the company retire,—the clock strikes eleven, when the gentleman and his wife go to rest.
This, my Fanny, is a true description of the method of the life of a good man of fortune in the country.—I fhould be glad to know what one virtue is here exhibited.—But now for the lady of the mansion.
She riSes about nine,—by ten has finished her tea,—^and if fhe has chib dren, I mean daughters, I take it for granted, they are Sent to Some of our improving boarding-fchools in or near the metropolis;—or, otherwiSe, fhe has a French governefs in the houSe, to whom the girls are wholly entrusted; this being the prefent reigning mode of polite education.—The good lady, then, perfectly Satisfied her children in the high road of instruction, has nothing herSelf to do with their education, r—But to proceed with her day*
Breakfast
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	157
Breakfast being over, stie finishes working a leaf in an apron, or if she is fentimental., writes to a friend., or faun-ters into the park.—Perhaps keeps a few Chinefe pheaSants, or filk-worms, which employ much idle time that might be better managed ;—but this is taste.
The morning being at length killed., the hour of dreshng arrives, which, with trying a new head-dreSs or two^ in order for the enSuing races, in the next county town, Sufficiently fill up the time till the bell rings for dinner. Here the good lady takes her feat, and this doing the honours of the table, is perhaps, the greatest buftiefs of her life. She remains at this board of luxury till Some little time after the deSert is removed, and then retires into her drawing-room, where cards (if any company) - tea, and perhaps a turn in the gardens, empLoy^e^hours till the time of Supper ; after whicTi'thcdioiii* oTrest Soon
arrives.
I5S	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
arnves, and thus finishes the little bu~ fineSs of the day.
This, my dear Mifs Sidney, is nearly the conStant life of even what are called the heft people living.—T'hat Such lives are paiSed without being marked wsith vice., I grant; but, alas ! alas ! where are the aftive virtues which should adorn and ennoble the human life ?—Thefe good people are undoubtedly harmlefs and bioffenjive, and So are the marble Statues in their gardens ; but do they Search out for objects of diftreSs ? do they ever enter the Sor^ did hut of poverty ? do they themSelves See the shivering wretch at their gates fed and cloathecl ? or are the remains of their luxurious table carefully distrir buted among their indigent neighbours ah, no!—Do they inftruct the ignorant? adviSe the imprudent ?—comfort tlie drooping heart of the afflicted? or draw forth, and reward modest ment hid in obSeunty.^—no^ not one of thefe virtues-
A LESSON FOR LOVERS,	1^9
tues do they practiSe.—Do they even think the inSiruction of their own children a duty incumbent on themSelves^ or take So much as the least thought or concern about improving their morals '—that interesting affair—that most of all important confiderations, in which, -not only their preSent, but their future state of happinefs depends.-—-No, this is never done by t he great and affluent: —they would be aStonished at the bare mention of So great a fatigue. To aV flaitt from evil is thought virtue fufficient,^ but I very greatly fear, that the omif fion of our duties is as culpable as crimes committed.
You will be lost in aStoniShment, my dear young friend, at the deception you will meet with mcharaflers throughout every rank of life, from the highest to the lowest.. All the world (at least our refined^ our polite wmrld, as it is called) feems to act in a maJL I know, at this time, Several most extraordinary
good
l6o	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
good characters, who, ’tis true, owe not one Shilling in the world:—never drink,—nor game :—are constant attendants on the divine worship :—talk much of morality, virtue, and So forth :
'—and yet, my Sweet girl, inexperienced as you are in the ways of this world, can you be brought to believe there is Scarcely a more unworthy character to be found ? They keep up the hypocntical shew of Sanctity; but cruelty, tyranny, and every Species of the most inSolent contempt appear in their private families to all around them.—-A deServing wife, dying of a broken heart; children pitiable, and wretched to the extreme, their education totally neglected; are too often Seen in the habitations of theSe worthy perfonages.
■—^When I Survey the placid Serenity —the fee7?iing benevolence-—the foft footlF ing demeanour of theSe grand deceivers^ my Surprise is eq,ual to my detestation, and I am ready to exclaim aloud, in
the
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	l6l
the words of an excellent author of our Sex,
“ And you, my gentle Sir, So meek. So true-—
“ But here I’ll strip ye, and expofe to view.
* * * *
5jif	*	-»
“ Thy wife, thy children, tremble in thine eye,
“ And peace is banistied, when the father’’s by.”
To deceive 'luell, my Fanny, feems now the grand art—the Sole buSmefs of life.
One could hardly believe, but So it is, that it is very postible for a man to pay his tradeSman with great exadpefs, yet never bestow a stngle penny on an object of distrefs.—It is very postible he may keep his church constantly, and inveigh bitterly against the fcojfers at religion, and the vices of wine and vjomc?i; and when he walks the street, turn away his eye with the chafte look of a vestal, from every young or pretty woman he meets :—^yet will this hypocrite, under pretence of perhaps vi-
fiting
r
.162	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
Siting Some Sick friend in the country, Steal into a hackney-coach, which corn veys him to Some private Snug little lodging near the metropolis, to visit a pretty young girl he keeps there, whom to debauch he has perhaps uSed the most vile arts.—And poSsibly he may chuSe to add adttltery to his crimes of this kind, and have, in Some other corner, the Fdife of the man for whom he feigns a friendship, and invites daily to his table.
Is this poshble V my ujtfufpeBing young friend ashs.
Most constantly done, believe me.
Be upon your guard, my good Mifs Sidney, against thefe impofters. I would have you (and So I advife my Emma} to be intiocent as the r/o'ue, but yet wife as the ferpent. The more, my innocent young friend, you See of this falfe-thing, the world, you will find fresh matter still for wonder and indignation. You will fee many ^ good lady,
whofe
A LES60N FOR LOVERS.	16-3
whofe time is much devoted to her cloSet-devotions, and to the divine Service of the neighbouring church, in the intervals of either, wholly employed in calumniating her neighbours, or in rendering her poor Servants miSerable by a continued Series of Scolding and ill-nature, A poor relation may pine in want and obScurity; for this good lady	;
has Jiohkr aims than giving Small pecuniary matters. She intends after death (for she does not approve gw/r/g in her lifetime) to leave a very considerable Sum to an hofpital in her neighbourhood, where her name will be carved, and her good works Specified in capital letters to future ages.
You will See, besides, my dc^r child, the chafe dJfconfolate widow, who, as ShakeSpeare admirably remarks,
‘	Shudders at pleafureri very name,’^
has her favourite John to amuSe her melancholy hours.—But this character is too odious to dwell upon,
You
164	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
You will frequently, my young friend, be delighted with the extreme charity (as you will fuppoSe it) of thoSe gooif ladies who often take a young girl, in very indigent circumstances, by way of compatiion,—But be not deceived by this fpecious., and, to all appearance, very agreeable title; for be affured, the poorest beggar, who, as Otway fays,
Lives on fordid fcraps at great men’s doors,’”
is infinitely more happy than the above 'Wretched companion,, as She is called.—It is true. She Sits at the luxurious table of this good lady; but, from certain looks She receives, is afraid to either eat, or to Speak.—The Servants look on her with envy, with a mixture of contempt. If She, at table, calls for bread or water, they will be Sure to bring her Something different. Perhaps, once in a twelvemonth, She occupies a torner of the coach, to make a visit in company with her benefaffrefs, but is rated afterwards in her return home, for daring
A LESSON FOR LOVERS*	165
ing to open her lips in Such an astern-bly, or for Saying^f/, when She Should perhaps have Said no. Thefe poor un-happy girls, whofe lives are much more wretched than that of a galley-stave, are, in fact, kept for a kind of butt on which the good charitable lady, when She finds herfelf neither stck nor well, which is often the cafe, when her lord has diSpleaSed her; or when her milliner has disappointed her of a new cap; when her favourite lap-dog or monkey is dead; or She has had the miS^ fortune of bein^ neglected at the last ball;-—has nothing to do in the midst of all thefe diSasters, but to vent her ill-humours, her overflowing ill-nature on the poor wretch who, she knows, dares not open her mouth in return, but must “ fit like/nfte/zccon a monument,” becmtfc she is fed., doathed and houfed under her hoSpitabie roof. Better would it be to
“ Meet the hungry lion.
Or houfe with wolves in open air,”
But
iteb	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
But methinks I fee a tear stealing down the cheek of my gentle MiSs Sidney : it would, indeed, make “ pity’s Self to grieve,” on reflecting there arc numbers of poor, opprefSed, helplcSs, young women, in the Same wretched sttuatian.
Emma is now come to finish her letter.-—I must, however, add, that my health, which you So kindly enquire after (the want of which, as you know, was the foie cauSe of my leaving my dear hushand in Anicrka) is still but very indifferent.
Adieu: believe me, most affectionately,
Your’s,
SUSANNA MILLWOOD.
Mifs Mtihvood, in continuation.
WORTHY, excellent woman, as, my mother is, what a charity will it be in good Mrs. NelSon, and iny beloved
Fanny,
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	167
Fanny, if they will comply with her, and my request in vifiting Oakley Lodge !—You will, my dear, be charm- • ed with its rural situation.—The Shady grove of pines, the winding streams that Shine between the hills, would all wonderfully pleaSe an imagination So fond of the beauties of our beneficent Creator, as is that of my dearest Fanny.—Some favourite lines I have read in our great poet, Mr. Pope, will best deScnbe theSe lovely Scenes.
“ Here hills and vales, the woodland and the plain, Here earth and water. Seem to strive again;
“ Here order, in variety we fee,
“ And yet, though all things differ, all agree.
Here waving groves, a chequered Scene difplay,
“ And part admit, and part exclude the day;
As Some coy nymph her lover’s warm addrefs,
, “Nor quite indulges, nor can quite fupprefs.
“ Here, interfpers’d in lawns, and op’ning glades,
“ Thin trees arife which Ihun each other’s (hades:
“ Ev’n the wild heath, difpkiys her purple dyes,
“ And ’midst the defert, fruitful fields arife.”
Ah! when will my dear father, the , general, return Srom thoSe hoScile Ame •
rican
l68	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
rican plains.'—When will he once more visit theSe Scenes of peace and Security ? —Surely, my Fanny, of all trials, it is the most grievous to have a beloved •friend expoSed to Such imminent perils! —But be hustl’d, my murmurs,'—his king—his country claim his Services, and we must Submit to the fad Separation.
You may depend on my writing, when I get to town to attend my dear little friend Patty on her approaching happinefs —but I fancy it will be deferred on account of a few relations of hers coming to the wedding, * till their arrival a Sew weeks hence.—Heaven preServe you, and believe me,
Most truly yours,
EMMA MILLWOOD.
P. S. This enormous paccpict I fend by an honest fiirn%er in our neighbourhood. I think I siiouid love you at Sweet Oakley Lodge, better than I did eveii on fiipboarL—^Do let ine try the experiment.
KP An
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	169
An interval now pafSed of Some months. The letters which were written in that Space are not inSerted, ^ containing nothing effential to the sto-' ry.—A very material circumSlance, however, happened to Colonel Melville, he having met with a wound in. one of the American engagements, which, though not mortal, had yet brought him into a very ill state of bodily health; on which account he got leave to return to England, being ad-vifed by his physician to try the Bath waters for his recovery.
Aster Spending a few days in London with his worthy friend, Sir Henry Bellniour, he arrived at Bath. He,had, on his immediate- return to England, diSpatched a meffenger to Earl Rich-,, ley’s Seat; but was informed that family were still in Ireland; a circumstance Colonel Melville did not know,as Some letters had unfortunately been lost in their p’alrage to America.	'
VOL. I.	H	It
lyO	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
It may be imagined Colonel Melville, on his arrival at Bath, paid a visit (as the distance was little) to his old fisia^id Mrs. NelSon.—He Saw the lovely girl who reigned Sole mistreSs of | his Soul—he obServed a Secret languor I in her appearance (notwithstanding the joy her innocent heart, on his arnva], testified), which made her, in his enraji-tured eyes, ten thoufand times more beautiful than ever.—He was astonished at the improvements she had made in thoSe accomplishments for which she had masters ; he was struck with the charms of her increasing stature, now in the full perfection of youthful beauty. In truth, his virtuous reSolution was put to the Severest trial in perfe-venng in his fixed reSolve, to abfent himSelf, as much as pofsible, from the habitation of this dear, this dangerous girl—dangerous, becaufe he thought himSelf bound by every tie of honour to
fulfil
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	I7I
fulfil his engagements with Lady Charlotte, and to marry her at all events.
Such was the extreme honour of this worthy man, he made one visit, only, to Mrs. Nelfon, and feigned Some ex-GuSe for absenting himSelf ever after. In fine, he found it absolutely neceffary for his peace that he Should not expofe himfelf to the hazard of Seeing the enchanting beauty of the young, and art-leSs Fanny ; and more eSpecially, as he was now convinced, from the whole of her behaviour, in that one interview, that he was far from being indifferent to the dear girl.
He had written to Lord Richley, but as yet had not received an anSwer.— In this manner circumstances remained, when the following letter was written by one lady to another, who were both then at Bath.	' ■
n s	L E t-
172.	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
LETTER XIV.
MISS FREELOVE TO MISS CHILTON.
, J\ty dear Gatty,
^	Bath.) May IK,
j^BSOLUTELY wounded, almost to death!—for,
“ From every part a winged arrow flew.”
0	my dear, fucli a man have I Seen!
—Nay, a perfect demi-god !-—-a Nar-•udiis !—-a. man of the moon!—Such eyes !—Such a figure !~his manner !— O Heavens! never was your poor friend fo Struck—--So totally over head and ears in love.—	. .
But with whop'' you aSk.
Listen child, “ whilst I the tale un-foist"
1	w^ent last night to the ball, for the fix*st time.—Ah 1 v/ould I had Staid and Said my prayers at home !"
■ Cl	•	To
^ /
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	173
To a very bisiliiant affembly, as my evil stars would have it, to the new rooms I went.—My drefs enchanting:
■—pale pink, with Silver stoimces:— my jewels. Such as drew the envy of every woman in the room:—my hair drest with Such exc^uifite taste (for you know I always keep that most uSeful of beings in the houSe, a French hair-dreffer, to whom I give fifty guineas a-year),—my hair, I repeat, fit to captivate a thouSand modern beaus, could however, I think, be furpaffcd b}^ no cm whatever, except by the lucky hand I had yesterday at my toilette, in So beautifully mixing the lilly with the roSes I laid on my cheeks, that imagination, I Should fuppofe, could not, in its wildest flights of fancy, equal my appearance : thus charming—and vjijh--ing to charm., did I enter the ball-room, with an air noble, yet delicately languishing, and Sweetly feminine.
H 3	You
174	^ LESSON FOR LOVERS.
You well know, my dear Gatty, nothing in this world can equal the ecstatic delight of Sailing up a crowded room, whilst you have the heartfelt rapture ' of hearing from the men—What a fine creature!—a charming girl!—who is fhe what is stie ?—-where did She come from ?”
All this, and much more, was Said, believe me,—In short, a general buzz ran through the whole ajjembly; when I, perfectly unmoved.^ Swam up the room, and took my Seat.—In a moment I had the immenSe Satisfaction of hearing it announced, in pretty loud whifpers, that I was Mifs Freelove, the great heireSs, niece to Sir Thomas Freelove.
I was aSked to dance by Lord D-----;
but this I refufed, intending not to expend all my stock of charms at once ; but to manage them wifely : I choSe to (it still, and reconnoitre the male part of the company.
Whilst
A tESSON FOR LOVERS.	175
Whilst my eyes were glancing over a few inllpid fellows, who were gazing as much at my jewels as my face,— what Should enter the room but the finest figure in nature !—A colonel, an* pleaSe ye,—drest in the most bewitching manner ofmilitai-y elegance.—‘His perSon,—his fine features,—eyes and hair—uncommonly attraflive !—^Heavens ! what an air of manly dignity throughout his whole form !—and yet what SweetneSs !—He appeared, however, far from being in a state of health I a melancholy too was Spread over his fine countenance, which gave him inexpressible charms :—his right arm hung in a Sash, which gave me to imagine he had most probably been lately wounded, and returned from America.
You know, my dear, I am particuii iarly partial ta an officer in the army. —In short, who can withstand a Scarlet coat, with all its enchanting appendages.^—Judge, then, if Such a figure as H 4	I have
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
I have defcribed, and of my favourite frofeJIton was to be beheld with indifference.—In a word, I at once yielded np to the blind deity, who at that moment transfixed his very sharpest arrow in tlie centre of my boSom.—I looked at Colonel Melville (for that is his name, I find)—I fighed—I Softly exclaimed in my heart, “ Thou art the man!”—Again I fighed, and looked : —when he, finding a vacant Seat just by me, flung himSelf into it, with a care-leSs languor in his air, which was wliol-ly irreSiStible:—but to my astonishment (would you believe it, child ?) he hardly vouchsafed me a lookthough I put a thouSand little arts in practice, which you and I Catty, are acquainted with.—I adjusted my tucker—I moved my bracelet, to Ilaew my well turned arm:-—Still the handSome inSenfible (though in a bail-room) Sat with his eyes fixed on the ground, as if lost in thought.—Is this man blind r” thought
T
i,.——*
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	177
L—At length I dropped my fan. This manoeuvre will do certainly,! concluded; —but, alas ! he either did not, or would not fee this fan, though almost at his feet! for he, a moment after, rofe and walked to a gentleman at Some little distance. In short, my dear, I really felt mySelf nettled.—What an opportunity had I given him of preSenting me with this ufeful part of my dreSs! He had fat by me for the Space of five minutes, with just the fame cold com' poSure as he would by his great grandmother.—Intolerable this, you must allow. I was dying to know if he was married or single.
'Fhe company being much engaged in dancing, I Sauntered into the card-room, where the first object I Saw was my gentleman.—“ Nov/ (thought I) my lafl . and grand effort must be made to excite his attention.’'—^Vdu know, child,
I am a perfect mistreSs in the art of faming gracefully:—an empty feat that H 5	moment
lyS	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
'	_ moment prefented itfelf almost cloSe to
where he was standing.—This opportunity was not to be overlooked.—^I flung mySelf into the feat with a tottering languid air,’ and Softly exclaiming.
Oh Heavens i^the exceffive—the heat—O, I faint!—On Saying which, I clofed my eyes, and fell back in the fnttieft fit., child, you ever beheld.
I heard, on my Soft exclamation, for I did not chuSe to open my eyes, a violent clutter and fuSs of all around me.—In a moment I had twenty fmelL ing-botries applied to my nostrils,— and was almost Suffocated with eau de /are—-Spirits of hartshorn, &c. for you may eafily conceive the fainting of fuch a woman in figure as myfelf made no fmall bustle .“At length I thought proper to breathe a gentle figh,—to ex-tend my arms, and at last to open my languid eyes.—But,Heavens! what was my transport, on finding the bewitching Colonel himfelf to be the first in
aflisting
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	179
affifling me, and prefenting me, on my returning to life, with a glafs of cold water'll
“ Drink this, pray. Madam (Said the enchanting man, with a tone of voice inexprestibly Soft); how do youi'—ave you better?”
“ You are very good, Sir (Said I, Softly lifting up my eyes, and fixing them on his), I—am better—^the exceS-five heat—quite overcame me—I muSh retire—I must have my chair called.” —I looked round me.
“ Will you give me leave, Madam (faid the charming fellow), to attend you to your chair.”
Ha, ha (thought I), have I got you at laSt ?
I attempted to nfe—but here was So weak, as you will SuppoSe, from my late
The exceflive vanity' of MiSs Freelove, made her conlsi-ue the common ciAlUy of Colonel Melville into z particular attention to her; an idea which never entered his head.
disorder,
l8o	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
disorder, I could hardly Sland without help—I tottered—and Seemed ready to fall.—His arm was immediately of-fered with a most graceful bow.—I accepted it to lean on.—Oh, Gatty, what was then my pride !—^my pleafure!— Thus Supported, I faintly walked, resting on the arm of the finest young fellow in the univerfe, to my chair,—into which he put me;^—and bowing with inimitable grace, wished me a goodnight.—I thought he Sighed,—but am not certain.
I am absolutely dying for another interview.-—He must—he shall be mine« —Can my f erf on. be overlo.okedP>^—can my fortune be defpiSed ?—ImpoSlible ! —No—no—Gatty,—I have no fears of that kind ;—^and if I do; not give you occasion to congratulate me as Mrs.». Melville in one poor montli, why I will give you leave, child, to make me eat and drink my whole stock of coSine-tics. May-dews, and bloom-waters.—-
Tc
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	I 8t
To be Sure, I could wish this charming fellow had a title—there is Something So pretty in the Sound of my lady—^Well I one cannot have every thing.—After all, if he should be a married man!— But he will do-:, even then, to flirt with. —No matter for the frowns of a jealous wife.—I need not explain myfelf fiirther to you, whofe fentiments on- the Subject of amou^ and gallantry, are pretty much the fame with thofe of Your affectionate
K. FREEL.OVE*
\ t	n ... i	■ 'V
m. ,,	,	..1,11	,11	... n
LETTER XV.
THE SAME TO THE SAME.
Jdath^ May. to.
' Congratulate me, my dear
Gatty 1
‘V What I has a wedding,” you cry, already taken place
No,,
182	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
No, child:—too early days yet to talk of that;—but, however, yoil may with me rejoice, that every thing is in the happiest train imaginable for Such an event taking place*
Would you believe it, child ? I am now under the fame roof with Colonel ' Melville.
“ How is this you fay.
Have patience, and I will tell you.
I most fortunately heard where he lodged, which it was no difficult matter to discover, as I had my emiffaries at work. A thought instantly occurred, how mighty clever it would be to get under the fame roof with himfelf.. In that cafe, you know, my dear, a thoufand little opportunities might aisife of feeing him—and tete-a-tetes in-expreffibly delightful, I would Set my wits to work to procure.
No fooner, then, had I heard that Colonel Melville lodged in an extreme handfbme lioufe (and no other lodger in
it)
A LESSON FOR LOVERS*	iS^-
it) near the Circus, than I instantly began to find a number of faults with my ajjartments. Tshe fun was intolerably hot, my windows admitting too much of its rays my crimfon bed of damafk was too warm for the feafon :—the street was noiSy:—in Short, I picked a thouSand faults with my Situation. I Sent for the mistrefs of the houfe, mentioned the particulars of my Complaints,, and told her I could bear with the inconveniences no longer,—The poor woman, to fay the truth, eiJtprefTed her deSire of doing every thing to accommodate me agreeably :—but I told her that was out of her power, for I disliked the Situation of her houfe, and that I was determined to leave it. She gave me a look of furprife and concern, and left the room. So here I ‘ am, child, writing in the very next a-partnient to that of Colonel Melville* I have, however, not yet been able to put any of my stratagems into execution,
184	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
lion, as it was only yesterday in the evening I ansived here ; and this morning he is gone out to take an airing.— I am fixedly reSolved he Ihall not efcape me :—nay, it is impostible.
Since my last letter, I have been lucky enough in meeting him in public. I went a few nights since to the play, where the first perSon I Saw, in the fame box, was my handSome Colonel: but, to my SurpnSe, he appeared not to recollect me.—Or, perhaps, what is indeed more probable, he might, from motives of diffidence,, and fear of ojfend-^ ingy forbear Speaking^'. However that may be, I was determined to avail my-felf of the opportunity that offered.— He looked, if postible, more enchant-ingly than at the ball.
I Sat Some time confideising how I should accost him ; when perceiving he had a play-bill in his hand (obServe
How ealily does vanity reconcile every thing to its own d5,dlres.l
I Sat
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	iS^
I fat very near him) I put 6n one of my most bewitching looks, and leaning gently forward, Said, in a Soft voice,— “ May I beg the favour, Sir, of looking for one moment at the play-bill you have in your hand There is one performer whofe name I Should be glad to know.”
“ Most willingly. Madam,” replied he, bowing,—but did not Still Seem to recoiled he, had ever Seen me before.
On my returning the bill,—“ I am much obliged to you, Sir,” fiiid I.— indeed (affecting a-little stutter) I have raany-^many thanks to return on ^ another occaSion.”
Madafn!” returned he, Somewhat Surprised.	- -
“ Your obliging care of me,” re-plied I, “ in my fainting-fit the other 'night at the ball, deServes -my zttmofi thanksP
“ I stiould have been wanting, Madam, in humanity,” anSwered he, not
to
186	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
to have affisted you, or any lady in the like distreSs.^^
, I did not much like, my dear, his iiny lady, as it was putting me upon a gencraliooXing.—However, in the courfe of the evening, I tliink I pretty well attracted his notice,—and may venture to affirm my conquest is certain. The moment the play was over, though there was to be an entertainment after it, he got up, and bowing, wifhed me a good-night.
I think,” Said I, yawning, I begin myfelf to be tired.—I Shall go home -—the entertainment is but stupid, I fancy,”
I flung on my cloak—and as he then too was departing, he offered me his hand to lead me out. Imagine my rapture to be a fecond time led out in public by this charming fellow, the eyes of the whole houfe upon us!—all Bath, most certainly, will give me to him before to-morrow night.
“ WhoSe
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	187
“ WhoSe Servant, Madam, shall I call?’' Said the too amiable man, who, I think^ more than once had Squeezed my hand as he led me to my chair.
What! thought I, you would-be glad to know my name, I fuppofe.— “ Mifs Freelove’s Servant,” Said I aloud. So that he was now acquainted with my name, at least.
I stung myfelf into my chair with all the fine airs of a LadyS---,and Sweet-
ly Smiling, wished him a good-night.
I must here break off,being this instant going to the Pump-room with a large party.
Wednefday morning.
Every thing is en-train—just as I could .wish* Thnce have I {^accidentally on 'furpo/e) met my gentleman on the stairs.—A profound bow from him the first time.—‘‘ How do you. Sir? (Said I, quite in the familiar style) I am your near neighbour—(pointing to my apartment)
188	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
ment)—I extremely like this part of Bath, and moved my lodgings accordingly.”
To be Sure, child, Some Smart fellows would have made me a few pretty compliments on this occasion, as how happy they were in having fuch a Lady as MiSs Freelove in the fame houSe, <&:c.—but the Colonel w^as Struck dumb —absolutely dumb—fuch an effect had my fudden prefenee on his Spints.
The next day 1 met him again, as if by accident—he had a piece of music paper in his hand.
Are you musical, Sir.^” Said I.
“ A little, Madam,” returned he.
I am immoderately te,” implied I; “ I have often (carelefsly) a little crajh in my apartments, and I intend Soon to have a famous Singer who is here :—I shall have a Sinall party to hear him ; and, if it is agreeable to you, Shall be glad of your company, as you are musical.”
He
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	189
He bowed profoundly low:—and away ran I to my apartment. Some Squeamish prudes, I SuppoSe, would have called me over forward,—and that I had been making advances to the Colonel ;—but you know, child, a woman of fashion, as I am, is abdve all vulgar' forms and starched ceremonies.
The next day, I met my handSome Melville. Mine he foon will be to all intents and purpoSes. I was running up stairs, just come from the Pump-room, when, as I Say, I met the lovely fellow coming down.
Now, thought I, you shall not efcape me.—At that moment I contnved to strike my stipper against the stairs—	;
and down I fell—and violently exclaimed, “Ol I have broke my ankle!—O my ankle !—ah, theSe nasty French heels!”—I had no need to Say more, for, like winged lightning, my handSome fellow stew down five steps at once; and tenderly endeavounng to
raife
190	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
raiSe me up-“ Are you hurt, Madam?” Said he, in a tone of voice Soft as an angel’s.
I have certainly,” Said I, “ broke my ankle.—O, I am in exquisite torture I”
“ Let a Surgeon be Sent for” Said he»
Kind, was this not ?
I tried to help mySelf with his asiist-ance from the ground. “ I will hope the best,” Said I, as I had Substantial rea-Sons why I did not chuSe an experienced Surgeon stiould examine my Soot—being unhurt.—Perhaps it may be, (rubbing my ankle and foot, whilst, I had contnved my flipper fliould drop off) perhaps it may be ^ only a violent bniiSe.—I will try to stand.-—Shall I beg the favour of your arm ?—Surely, Co-' lonel, you was born for my fupportV— I laid a particular emphafs on that last word. “ If you can walk,” Said he, ‘‘ it may be better for your Sprain.-—
Lean
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	I9I
Lean-—lean, pray, Madam, your 'whole 'lueight on me.”
I did, I affure you, Gatty ; and that too pretty clofely.—Ah, my dear, what would Billy Dimple, and Captain Saum ter, and half a hundred more of my dying enamoratos,. have given to have been So near me as was then Colonel Melville!
At length, with extreme pain, wry faces, and miferably hobbling, I got to the top of the stair-cafe; when, observing his dining-room door, which was cloSe to me, to stand wide open, a clever thought struck me.
Oh!” Said I, I can walk no further—I cannot,”
Will you do me the honour,” Said iny Supporter, “ to rest a moment in my dining-room.?—there is an eafy chair.”
Just what I aimed at, Gatty.—^Tvly apartments, I Ihould here Say, were
about
192	A LESSOK FOR LOVERS.
about ten Steps farther in the fame paS-fage.
“ I thank you, Sir, you are very good. I will hobble to that Sopha if I can.”
At length, after much Seeming difficulty, I was pleaSingly Seated in Colonel Melville’s lodgings.-------I looked
round, and immediately Spied a harp-ficord, a violincello, and other shufi-cal instruments.
“ O, I find you are a proficient. Sir.”
He Smiled, but Said, no.
I begged, whiiSt I was reSting my foot, he would oblige me with the Sound of his harpSichord. He Sat down to it, and played, with the greatest taste and elegance, a delightful concerto.
My Gcd! thought I, what a man is this !
A profusion of- compliments followed on my side, for his inimitable performance. My Servant then being rang for, I, with affected difficulty, got
to
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
to my own dining-room, to which very politely the most amiable of men attended me.
In the evening I received a genteel enquiry how my ancle did.
Even as my heart could wish, my' dear Gatty, does this affair gradually proceed.—Expect to receive Soon a wedding favour, accompanie'd with bride cake.
I intend, in a few days, to have Some Select hands for a Small concert, to which the Colonel, most certainly, will ' be invited. Being not quite recovered from my fall, I am inventing an elegant dijhahille for the occafion : a most enchanting dreSs, believe me. A matter of fitch importance' is a Sufficient ex-cuSe for my abrupt conclufion.
Ever yours,
K. FREELOVE. -
VOL. I.	, I - LET-
194	LESSON FOR LOVERS,
LETTER XVL
COLONEL MELVILLE, TO S% HR-NRY , .	■	EELLMOUR.
My dear friend.,
——Bath, May l\.
X HOUGH preffed in time, having foine diSpatches to Send this evening for Amenca, yet your kind defire of begging me to write three lines concerning my health, must be complied with. My wound is better—but, alas 1 my bodily health far—far from well. A low fever hangs on my Spirits, and preys upon me continually. But it cannot be otherwiSe, torn, as my heart is, between the Struggles of honour and gratitude for the Richley family, still in Ireland, and for the tenderest affeclion of the lovely Fanny.
¥ ou
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	I95
You afk me in your last letter ^ when I Saw her.^ Alas! my Snend, I have in-flisted an eternal banifhment on my> Self from all my Soul holds dear, tho' only five miles aSunder.—I will not—> cannot See her.
✓
----Magic is in her eye.”—
She is. in gracious mind; in manner,
“ And in perfon, the perfect pattern
“ Of all female beauty.”
% am endeavounng to divert my mind from thinking on this too dear, too dangerous maid, by the various little trifling amuSements of this idle place 5 —but alas! alas! fie reigns triumphant,
“ Fills every fenfe,
And pants in every vein.”
If a man in my sttuation of mind, could be diverted at objects about him, Bath certainly abounds with more cha-I'Rcters to excite the rifihk faculty than any other place whatever.—We have at preSent a choice Set of characters of
This letter appears not.
I 2	■ all
Ip6	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
all kinds.—Coquets in abundance.—In the houfe I am in there lodges, at this time, the most finifhed character of that order I have ever met with.—Never did I behold So vain, So pert. So affected a thing.—Her name is Freelove, a woman of fortune, I fancy :—but I know not what to think of her.—I am, however, civil to her, as I lodge in the Same houfe, but nothing farther.—On my word, fhe is moSt maiwellousty conn plaiSant to your friend :—but, alas!
“ vain are all her fond endeavours.”— My heart is irrevocably engaged.—Ah! would I could Say my hand were to go with it! I fancy it will not be long be- ! fore Ladv Charlotte returns.	i
You tell me in your last letter fhe has had two or three very considerable offers of marriage, but that fhe has re-fuSed them for—ah Bellmour! I will , endeavour to do her jujlice.
And So, at last, your pretty cousin Patty has made you acknowledge you
are
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	Ip)
are not proof against the powerful eye of beauty. I know no man So likely to be happy in the married state as yourSelf; delighting, as you do in every domestic virtue.—Tou.^ my Bellmour, will have the woman of your choice— and both will be, as my favourite Poet ThomSon beautifully exprestes it,
“ Each, to each a dearer felt'.”—>
Your kind endeavour to divert me, in the midst-of all my prefent gloom and low Spirits, by fending me a receipt to cure love, I afifure you did not only excite my rifible muScles into a Smile, but, in fact, I laughed heartily. I give you leave to laugh, in your turn, at my an-Swer, which I have attempted in verfe. But before I tTanfcribe this anSwer of mine, I must repeat your never-failing receipt, which fays, “ Take eight ounces of Co?tfideratio?i, half that quantity of Indifferenceten grains of IngratF tude^ fix Scruples of Patience.^ too good I 3	handfuls
I9S	A LESSON FOR LOVERS. '
handfuls of Employment., four months Ahfetice., and add as much Dijcretion as you Jileafe ; thefe boil together without iiv termifiion, till a third part be con fumed :—cool it with a few Slights: Spread it on the thoughts of your mistreSs’s perfeBions., and apply the plaifier lukewarm to your heart, wdiere it is to remain till it drops off of itfelf. If this * fails, you tell me my cafe is deSperate.’' This is your recipe, and here follows my anfwer.
“ Oh! kind physician, thy advice will prove “ But little Service to thy friend in love.
‘‘ Wh.ene’er Confideration I apply,
New beauties in my Fanny I deScrv.
“ To all perfections Ihe has Such pretence,
“ /iS warms my foul from cold “ Ingratitude'’s a guilt file does not know';
“ She thanks the Heaven’s for blesiings they bestow: “ She other obligations never knew,
“ For all the earth affords is but her due.
Bid Patience to the w'retch upon the wheel,
“ He knows no torments like the pangs I feel. Employment Irsi'a my peace of mind destroyed,
For ’tis on her my thoughts are all employed.
‘‘ To
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	199
To little passions Ah fence gives a cure,
“ To great ones adds, and makes them to endure,.
“ For Imperfedions would you Search my fair,
“ Find Spots on ermin, catch the ambient air.
Teach me the art to be no more her ssave,
And write thy (kill upon the restleSs wave.
“ All theSe you must perform ’ere you can hnd ‘‘ Fault in her perSpn, blemissi in her mind.
“ Thy ikill is vain, nor can my pain remove:
“ Too tnie, alas I—there is ?2o cwre for love.”
Adieu, my dear Harry, it it now high time to conclude. Believe me,
most faithfully yours,
CHARLES MELVILLE.
LETTER XVII.
MISS FREELOVE, TO MISS CLIFTON.
-r	iBath^ Flay 20.
VV E go on (meaning the dear Colonel and mySeif, child) sts Swimmingly as heart could wish:—in short the affair is in great forivardnefs :—he looks, and fighs, but has as yet made no diredk .
I 4	declaration
200	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
declaration of his paffion :—I expect it however daily, nay hourly,—He plays with my lap-dog :—has visited, on invitation, my tea-table more than once : —has been prefent at my little concert—and appeared wholly ravished at the part I bore in it. There is, as I . think, a timidity^ however, about the charming fellow, for which I cannot account; considering that I behave to him with all the French freedo7n imaginable. I am going to the play to-night; and immd to give him fucL an invitation to be my conduBor^^ that it will be impossible for him to resist it.—I am in-- tcrrupted—Milliners and mantua-mak-crs !—I come—I come.
-•it-	^	^ H. ^	^
]\Io>iday ei'eniug.
I HA-VE just, my dear friend, heard a moSt disiigr^eable piece of news—indeed it has almost petrified me with " astonishment.—Can it be?—Imposii-ble!
« What?”
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	201
What ?’^—you ash.
Why, child, take all at once the horrid Sentence.—Colonel Melville, it Seems, is engaged, and shortly to be married to ^ ' Lady Charlotte Richley.—DeuSe take her for me.—She is amafingly hand-Some I understand—her fortune im-menfe, being the only child of Earl Richley. T'his most dreadful intelligence has almoSt deprived me of my reaSon :—I thought I should have died on the Spot, when the tidings were first communicated.—It is an abSolute fact,
MiSs Granger, who lives in the very neighbourliood of this detestable Lady Charlotte, who at preSent it Seems is in Ireland, Lucy Granger, I repeat, lives within a mile of Lord Richley’s feat in England,—and tells me this horrid match has long been determinecr bn. Her manner of revealing it, indeed, was So innocent and natural, I have not a doubt of the truth of this provoking affair. She accidentally had I 5,	a glimpfe
2.0X	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
a glimpfe of the. divine fellow as Slie ■ came to me this morning.—On her entermg my apartment, “ Good God,” Laid she, “ what ! is not Colonel Mel-ville married yet.?—I fuppofe by his “ being alone in his carriage at the door “ the affair is not yet over.”
“ Why, no,” Said I, really taking the matter to myfelf; “ no-—ware not .
one yet—all in good time.—I don’t know how foon (looking down) I really (font know how foobi it may he—perhaps in about a month.—I shall not buy my cloaths ’till I get back to town.—My jewels and ec[uipage, you know, will ^ Soon be procured.—So you have., Mils Granger,” continued I, “ heard of our affair?—I may'venture to Say it will Soon be concluded.”
Here I looked accidently at MiSs Granger, who to my astonishment was Standing aghast.
But not to dwell on this shocking Subject,—Suffice it to Say, she at length
told
f
A tESSOSf FOR COVERS.	203
told me the whole liorrid tale.;—^In short, a Speedy marriage, if not timelj prevented, mujl, I find, take place.
1 concealed my tormenting chagrin, as much as I could from Lucy, as it woi ). h you know, have made a fine Sub-jeO, for diverfion.'"—I affected to fay, a lucky thouglit was it not ? that I Sup-poSed fine had meant Cohttel Benfon, (an officer in the guards) who, you know, has long; had a tendre iox me.
O how I rave !—^Curfed—curfed fate ! Gatty, I am absolutely distracted. —Think for me—contrive—Set all your wits to work, hw this formidable match may be prevented.—But thou art a Stupid poor foul!—no invention in the world!—I begin to have a Scheme rumbling in my brain, which I thank Heaven is pretty full of inventions ' ril take a turn in my anti-chamber, and Summon a hundred little miSchiev-ous Sylphs to my aid.
I have
204	-A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
I have it, Gatty, I have it in this little plotting heart of mine :—it will do. —Melville,—the enchanting Melville Shall be mine at last; and that too without making ufe of any of the pretty Italian-methods of poifoned gloves, or other curious devices, to rid me of my too formidable rival.—Now, Gatty, is that dull head of thine Set to work.—Perhaps you will not gueSs my innocent stratagem for ten thouSand years.— Thou art, child, amazingly backward in theSe matters.—Well! I will take pity on thee.
You know there are Such things in the world as newSpapers.—I will Send a certain paragraph to a friend I have in London, to be infer ted in Some of the London papers,—two of which I constantly take in.—Now do you understand.^ now do you begin to comprehend me 1 What that important paragraph will be, you shall know *i my next.
I must
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	20^
I must abruptly conclude this letter, as not a day, nay an hour, is to be lost.
.—^You must allow, my dear fnend, my cafe is singularly finable.—Heavens! when I was, as I fondly imagined, on the very eve of happineSs,—then— then to have my cup dashed with gall! —O inSupportable !-—^Some girls would inStantly have recourSe to a gentle doSe of Laitdanum on Such an occasion—but I will firji try my innocent device—I must now Set about it—So can only add, that I am, at preSent,
Your much chagrined,
and dif'appohited fnend,
K-. FKEELOVE*
LETTER XVIII.
THE SAME TO THE SAME.,
%
J	Bath,.May 3a.
OY—joy—my Gatty !—never v/as a. Scheme So well contrived, or So hap-pily'executed, as the one—the important
20si	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
tant one I liave to relate. I have done her buflneSs pretty effectually, I fancy : her Ladyjltip., at leaSi, will never be Mrs*. Mehille.—Again I have him at my beck, child.-—But now for particulars* I Sent my paragraph to London, and by the next post day, down came the newfpapers under a cover to your then half broken hearted friend.—I found what I desired inferted, in the fullest manner, to my heart’s content. My eye ran over it with even rapture, asst doubted not the very heft effects would stow from it. I put theSe papers carefully by, and in the afternoon wrote a polite card to my gentleman to inform him, that I had just received Some new pieces of music from London, (which I really had) and that I should be glad if he would Send his violincello to my apartment, and come himSelf to try them over.—-I concluded with hoping he wmuld come to tea. At length, agreeable to my rec^uest, he came.—I
^	was
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	207
was in hopes to have had him all to mySelf, but one of thoSe infpid beings came in, called a good kind of young woman, a Mifs Fennymore:— a Sort of girl that would do well enough,, as Lady Townly fays, ‘‘ for a wdt afternoon in the country-;” but in this dear place of . gaiety and distipation, your g(iod girls are dreadful. However,, fhe came.
“ Sit down, child,” Said I, which she did, and I heard nei more of her than any other inanimate piece of JiULYKe, in the room.—But now for my Scheme of Schemes.
When we were in the midst of tea,
^—Melville fitting opposite, So that he could not avoid my Scrutinizing eye, —‘‘ Heavens 1” Said I, “ Colonel, I beg ten thoufand pardons, for not fend-• ing you last night’s papers.—Here they are,”—(routing them from Some books in the window, and taking one in my hand)-^“ let me fee—^let me fee,”—
continued
2o8 a lesson for lovers.-continued L looking them over,—‘‘ No news from America worth a farthing. —But here is a wedding I fee.—So— fo”—muttered I, “ fo Lady Charlotte is married at last.—Upon my word !— I believe there never was fo fine a woman in Ireland before, handfome as the hdJJt are Said to be.''
There I stopped to reconnoitre my gentleman.—Obferve,Ichofe this Scene to pafs at the tea-table, that he should not efcape my enquiring eye.
“ Colonel, won’t you drink another dish.^” ashed I, fixing my eyes on his; when oh ! Gatty, would you believe it, the fine fellow, who had fat before careleSs, languiSliing, and inattentive-, was roufed by the broken Sentences I had muttered.
“ A wedding !—Ireland !—Lady Charlotte !—what—what—is that. Madam.^” Slid he visibly fluttered.
Ah—thought I—is it then foP
“ You
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	209
“ You was reading Something about Ireland., Madam :—I beg to hear it.”
I now, Gatty, with a most audible voice, and every grace of elocution, read as follows:
“ On Friday last wasmarned in Ireland, at the Seat of the Right Hon. Earl Richley, near Dublin, Sir Thomas Del-' wyn, Bart, to his Lordfhip’s only daughter and heireSs, Lady Charlotte Rich-ley, a lady of great beauty, fortune, and every accomplishment drat can adorn her fex. After the ceremony, the new married pair Set out for the feat of Sir Thomas, near Waterford, attended by a great retinue.”
I now looked up fitll in Melville’s face, when, Heaven’s ! never did I fee fuch evident marks of perturbation:—he was. in anuniverfal tremor.—His counte-' nance, from a glowing red, now turned, pale—then again red :—he hem’d,—lie took out his handkerchief—he cough’d, *—-and all this was done to hide his
disorder
210	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
diSorder^. WhilSt I, all Sweetly innocent., ashed, “ what is the matter, Sir, are you ill —I was juft going to be fawcy enough to offer my bottle of Salts ;—but, to my agreeable SurpriSe; I Saw no marks of fainting in the hand-
o
Somest face in the world :—no: So far from it, his eyes Seemed re-animated, as if with Some fiidden joy :—his cheeks glowed with beauty :—and throughout his whole frame, there appeared an air
* The reader will doubtleSs wonder that the Co-’ lone! Iliould Iliew Such evident marks, of confufion -at the marriage of a lady for whom he was perietstly indifferent; but the fact was this: his perturbation arofe from the hidden rapture which had Seized his heart, on the pofflbllity he could now be united to his adored Fanny.—Whoever has loved as the Colonel loved, will e?iily account for his feelings at this moment. So rapid are the ideas of lovers, and So apt are they to believe what they wi/h, that at once he implicitly believed the paragraph juft recited to be all gojfel. He had heard, to corroborate his belief, that Lady Charlotte had had offers of marriage made to her, and for a long time had received no intelligence, from Ireland.,
of
A LESSON-FOR LOVERS.	212
of ineffable Satisfaction. I repeat with agreeable furprife I Saw this: for at once it evidently appeared to me, that the Sudden fAtJh of pleafure which his every feature exhibited, Sprang from the hope that, now being rid of his IriJJj engage^nent., he might possibly obtain one day the favour of Mifs Freelovd.s hand.—I Saw the whole affair at once.—Well—well, my adored Melville, rest contented—my heart, my fortune, and perSon are entirely, I promiSe you, at your command. But to proceed.
He now began to laugh and chat on - a number of enlivening Subjects : indeed I had never before Seen him in Such Spirits.—Ah, thought I to my Self, how much, poor Lady Charlotte, are you deceived in this man !—No man, my Catty, if he had hroed a woman^ could in the hour of hearing She had given her hand to another, have betrayed Such; Secret Satisfaction. In
fact,.
£12	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
fact, I have nothing to do but to bring matters to a concluSion as Soon as pof-fible, left he Sliould hear the fair lady in Ireland Still continues a Spinster. But even then, child, I have found out the delicious Secret that he loves not Lady Charlotte.—I have likewiSe discovered, from a thouSand glances, fighs, ^^c* that he is not a little enamoured with your Stir friend Kitty.—I beg you will Send patterns of silks as Soon as pofiible. —I shall be mansied in white and sih ver.—But I have not half done with my plot of yesterday.
As my good genius would have it, the moft corroborating circumstance happened imaginable.
I think you know my old anni^ Dc~ ^ borah O.Dara, lives in Dublin ; and that about once a-year, the good lady takes it into her head to write to me. In short yeSterday I received this annual letter ; and most luckily just after we had finished reading the newSpaper.
On
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	21^
On taking the letter from the Servant, 1 Said, “ I shall now have fome account of this fine wedding, I Suppofe, . as theSe old maiden-ladies love to talk about weddings as well as we yuung ones.—Why, here’s a letter as long as my arm.—Good old Soul!”	i
I looked it over, whilst my fertile brain was at work.—At length I had the pleaSure of heanng the Colonel aOs, (just what I wanted) “ Have you, Mifs Freelove, any farther account of this wedding ?”
“ O yes !” anSwered Upon my word it was a most Splendid affair.—• Shall I read what my aunt Says
“ If you pleaSe, Madam, I am all attention.”
So I hope, thought I,—and accord-V ingly very fluently (nothing like an in' ventive brain, child) read as follows, after having mentioned the parties names.
The
214	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
“ The procefiion, for So I may call it, was truly elegant. Six carriages, the attendants with white and Silver “ favours, made no Small Show. Such “ a wedding has not been here for ‘‘ many years. I had a glimpfe of the “ bride, who appears to be a very love-“ ly woman.—The bridegroom too, “ appeared young and handSome.— The bride-maids, two young ladies ‘‘ of quality, were most elegantly drest. “ —Earl Richley (a very reSpectable character) looked as happy as any of them on this joyful occasion.—I was “ much pleaSed with a wedding which looked So much like thoSe I remeni-ber in former days, when I was a “ young woman; when open houSe “ was kept on thefe occasions, and fa~ ‘‘ milies for many miles invited. The “ parties then had no occasion to Jkulk “ into Scotland. I hope, my dear ‘‘ niece,, I stiall live to See you marned,
“ —Tell
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	21^
—Tell me if you are like foon to be “ a bride.”
“ Well,” Said I, “ Colonel, was not this an extraordinary wedding ?”
“ Yes, indeed,” replied he, with an air of the most perfect Satisfaction.
Thus, my dear friend, have I, with very little trouble, you See, brought matters almoSt to the point I wish :—' the Colonel is on the eve of declaring himfelf;—I shall not long protract his happinefs ;—-the day of days will Soon be appointed; the ceremony be over ;—and away we fly to dear London, to partake of its enchanting pleaSures. At preSent, as Lady Wijhfort fays in the 'Way of the World) I have Such an og/D of affair^ on my hands, that you cannot, in reafon, expect me to Scribble more now ; lint be affured, that in all situations, I shall ever remain,
Your very affectionate friend,
K. FRRELOrE.
L E 'F-
2i6	a lesson for LOVERS'.
LETTER XIX.
colonel MELVILLE TO SIR HENRY BELLMOUR.
A
LBath, Twelve at nights May 30.
ET no man deSpair, my dear Harry !—I have news to impart that will astonish you above expreshon.—At length the cloud that hung over me is at once diSpelled :—the fetters that Seemed by the inevitable hand of fate, to be preparing for me, are now burst in funder, and Fanny,—the enchanting Fanny, I may, and Soon, I hope, shall -call my own.
O Bellmour 11 am absolutely wild with joy.—What a turn has happened in my favour, when I was *even lost to hope! Heaven—that wonder-working power.
“ Pnthee,’’
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	217
Prithee,’^ you cry, “ ceaSe your raptures, Charles, and tell me what is this mighty cauSe of joy
Well then—in one word, Lady Charlotte Richley has given her hand in marriage to an IriSh Baronet:—the particulars I have had at large. In faft,
I liearcl a letter read from Dublin with a circumstantial account of the whole affair; besides having Seen it in the public papers.—Guefs my astonishment !—may happinefs attend her I Providence orders all for the best, for I find, by my feelings (or rather not feeling) on this occasion, that I never could have loved her as I ought.—An uni-verSal trepidation Seized me, most certainly, on my first hearing this inte-f reSting affair;—but it was the rap-.turous idea of the lovely girl at West-Green, that filled my Soul with transport, in the polSibility—nay, probahilK ty, that I novj most .hoi^otirably may make her mine.
VOL. I.	K	As
218	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
As there is no impediment now to bar our bliSsful union, to-morrow, by dawn of day, I Shall Set out for Mrs. NelSon’s, and lay my heart—my hand and fortune at the feet of the divine Fanny Sidney.—O Bellmour! think of my extacy !—shall I then live to call her mine ? yes, mine., by the most Sacred of all ties, the marriage-band.
Lord Richley, I imagine, and doubt not, has written me an account of this alteration in his family, but many accidents may have prevented my receiving it. I wrote immediately on my arrival in England, which however poSlib'ly, from Some miSchance, his Lord-ship may not yet have received.
It is now midnight, but though it is only this evening I heard this most interesting matter, I could not go to reft till I had diSpatched a few lines to my Bellmour.—To reft, do I Say —
No; Fanny has murdefd fleep.”
’Tis
A LESSON FOR LOVERS. .	2 Ip
’Tis well if I do not commit Some extravagant folly through my exceSs of tranSport.—To give you an instance :
I was this evening at the coffee-houSe, when a gentleman alked me how old I thought General Wastiino;-ton, the Amencan commander might be.^ my thoughts being wholly taken up with Fanny, I anSwered, about eighteen., I fancy.—He Stared with astonishment.
f ‘ But eighteen I” cried he, a wonder of his age!’’
Another ashed me if I thought there would be a junction of the two fleets ? ' and I immediately replied,—eyes Soft, yet piercing.
In short, I have absolutely lost the ufe of my reaSon ; I can think and talk of nothing but my beloved girl.
Rejoice with me, my faithful friend: but you are now a lover yourfelf, there-K 2	fore,
220	, A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
fore, in Some degree, can judge of the preSent Supreme delight of
Your happy and affectionate,
MELVILLE.
Prithee write, but don’t torment me with thy croakings, as, ‘‘ you can hardly think my news pollible!”—or, “ that it never can be So,” Sec. Sec* It is, my BelImour, an undoubtedfaSt.—I remember, in one of your letters, you mentioned her Ladyship having had Several offers of marnage.
ICT* Colonel Melville, as Soon as pof-fible, flew on the wings of love to the - charming MiSs Sidney, whom he had So long and pashonately adored.—He at once made a declaration of his Sentiments, and an offer of his hand and heart.—-It is needleSs to fay with what aflonishment, or with what joy the lovely girl received this pleasing con-feshon:—it indeed cannot be deScisibed.
Thofe
A LE&SON FOR LOVERS.	221
Tliofe few only who have been in the Same delicate circumStances with her-Self, can judge her feelings.—^She had, indeed, to fay the truth, long and tenderly loved Colonel Melville.—Destitute as she was of the , gifts of fortune, dependant as file was on the bounty of her patron, her young heart, fimple, and till then untouched, yielded itSelf a Spotlefs victim to all-powerful love.— The noble Succour Colonel Melville had given to this unfortunate maid, in the hour of her bitterest distreSs, when beSet with a rude band of declared enemies, her father lying dead before her, and miSery in every shape before her eyes ; his generous pity, his tender cares, and his exalted generosity, had all So far combined, as to render him as dear to herSelf, as fe was to this most excellent man. From the extreme hopelejfhefs of lier passion, her health wTts visibly impaired. Mrs. NelSon, with the tender anxiety of a fond pa-K 3	rent)
222	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
rent, enquired her malady, but was only anfwered that She was well—-quite 'Well. '
Most justly might thefe beautiful lines of ShakeSpeare be applied to the poor Fanny.
‘‘ She never told her love :
“ But let Concealment., like a worm i’th’ bud,
‘‘ Feed on her damaik cheek.
“ She pin’d in thought; and with a green,
“ And yellow melancholy,
“ She fat like Patience on a monument “ Smiling at grief.”
We would here give the Substance of the affecting interview between Colonel Melville and MiSs Sidney, but that every novel abounds with conversations between lovers (which, by the bye, it is utterly impossible to defenbe) and that though thefe Soft Scenes may be very pretty and agreeable to the parties concerned, they certainly are mighty dull at Second-hand.—Suffice it to fay, the enraptured Colonel had
stung
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.-	223
flung himfelf, in the tranSport of his declaration, at the feet of Fanny, and she had fainted in his arms.	'
Such was the noble unSufpecting heart of this moSt worthy man, that, all glowing as his honeSt breast was with truth and Sincenty, the SmalleSt idea, the least shadow of a doubt that the maiTsiage of Lady Charlotte might not, perhaps, be true, never once entered his head, as he certainly would have SuSpected MiSs Freelove as the la ft per-Son in the world capable of Such a Itlot. Not from his having a favourable opinion of her, but from looking on her as a very weak foolish woman, devoted wholly to vanity and pleaSure.—Alas! how was he deceived, as many others are, in that most Specious and detestable character, a coe^uet! TJie odious MiSs Freelove, like the reft of her tribe, hid under the tippearance of a thoughtlefs gaiety, and a careleSs play-. SomeneSs, the deepest cunning, envy>
K 4	rancour*
/
224	LESSON FOR LOVERS.
rancour, and, in Short, every malignant quality of a bad heart,
A few days had now pasted since she had put her late diabolical Scheme into execution, when a thought struck her, that, to prevent Colonel Melville’s knowing the truthtill she had drawn him into marriage, she would tiy to intercept any letter from Ireland., which might be left at the post-office for the Colonel. She accordingly Sent for letters of the above defcription, when, to her inexpreshble joy, there was a large pacquet just arrived.—On receiving k» she locked herfelf into her clofet, and greedily devoured the contents. They conveyed a fund of information to this bafe woman. Three letters were in the pacquet—-two from the good old Earl, who wrote with all the tender-nefs of a fond father;—and a long one from Lady Charlotte; Sensible and delicate in the highest degree. This was a pleasing difcovery to the wicked woman,
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	22^
man, as theSe letters informed the Colonel they should return in about fix weeks to England. Mifs Freest)ve, therefore, thought no time was to be /<y?, and was therefore determined to put all her advances into immediate execution ; but to her utter astonishment ^ and difappointment, she never could find the Colonel at home.—^She recollected, that from the next day after the newfpaper affair, he had not been in the lodgings two hours in a day.—He was not at the pump-room, the play, nor the rooms.—In short, he went abroad early, andstayed late;—a mystery which she could not fathom^. The reader, however, will truly and naturally conclude, that, as tlie fond heart of our worthy lover was devoted to Mifs Sidney, fo were all his hours.—Chance, however, in a very short time, discovered to her falfe rival what she fo much wished to know, and which the following letter to her friend will best explain.
' K 5	LET-
226	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
LETTER XX.
MISS FREELOVE TO MISS CLIFTON,
Bath, June bth,
L URIES Seize and tear me if I am not revenged of this inSenfible, this wretched Melville! OI have at length, my friend, made Such a mortifying diS-covery, that I am almost petrified with amazement!—Yes! yes ! he can love I find!—his haunts I have at last detected his odious haunts are not in the . city of Bath:—a Snug quiet retreat in the country is much more Secret and Secure.—O how my foul Spurns Such sty hypocriticaltranSactions!—But I will endeavour to give you the horrid particulars as well as I am able.
I think you know that I have an Italian finging-master to attend me thrice
a-week.
A LESSOIJT FOR LOVERS,	Z2’]
a-week.—Yesterday he came. I Had been wondering and fretting the whole morning where the Colonel could be, and was in no very good hfimourwhen my music-master arrived, who alfo, I Should here Say, uSed to attend hi?n as well as my Self.
After one Song, very badly perforcxi-
ed, my thoughts being full of nothing
but this wretch, this Melville, “ Your
.other Scholar,” Said I peevishly, “ Sig-
nior Mindora, is' not at home:—-nay,
' he is never at home, I think:-—I have
not Seen him theSe four davs.—Tt is
•/
very strange—very strange indeed.” GueSs my amazement, when the Italian anfwered me in his broken English, and with the most jmpsFmg polite-Ttefs imaginable, in the following manner.
^ “ It be no strange, Matame, for de fine gentelman to love de preety girl, i—De Colonel ride by my houSe ev’ry day:—he go to fee ieetelpretty mistreSs.
—She
• /
2,2 8	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
—^She have fine eyes,—fine breast,— fine air,—fine ev’ry ting*.’^
O the wretch f thought I, and was obliged to take out my Salts:—I thought I Should have fainted:—whilst the communicative Italian continued his tale.
Vest-Green be de Spot of pleafure where de feetel mistreSs be.—Dere be pretty arbour,—dere be de Snug aparte-mente.—De good Colonel never fail to go;—he be inteed de fine gentelman.
—She be ver yormg-—SEe be char-mante.”	|
And where (Said I to the wretch, who dwelt with delight on the lufcious
* It may perhaps be w-onderejd at, that the music-master Should So readily betray this vice of a kept-mistrefs (as he thought) in his Scholar, Colonel ?vlel-ville ; but the reader is desired to obferve, that the curious charaster who made the difcovery w'as an Italian Jinging-maJier} and that he came from a country as famous as France is for looking on the leetef •pretty kept-miflrefr^ fo far from a blot in the fcutcheon^ that it is looked upon in thofe countries as the most distinguilliing mark of a fine gentleman.
story,
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	22g
story, whilst I was ready to burst with rage and vexation) where is this West-Green you talk of ? Is it near Bath ? —At whoSe houSe does this great beauty reSide ?■—and where did yon See her.?”
“ She be call’d MiSs Sidney—and she live at Mrs. NelSon,—who be ver good voman to get de preety girl for de , handSome Colonel.— Yes, indeed.— Vest-Green be no more den five miles: —ev’ry body know that pleafant place.
-—^I did fee my good Colonel go into de houSe, and did See his leetel mistreSs, all charmante, stand at de vindow.— Ha, ha, taut I, my dear Sir, you know vere de pretty girl be.”
I could bear to- hear no more :—but Saying I was,a little engaged that morning diSmiffed my informant.—Indeed I had got quite enough.
Mindora was no Sooner departed, than I stung mySelf on the bed in an agony of grief, revenge and defpair.—
A
230	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
A thouSand Schemes I formed to friif* trate his farther visits to.this-—i-1 can-
not name her with common patience— but could fix on nothing.^—Alas! So young—So handSome, as She was described to be, She will long and deeply engage him.
Confusion on them both, Say I.— I believe every tittle of the horrid account to be true; my honest Italian told all in the natural simplicity of his heart:—he did not, hov*^ever, Seem to look upon the matter in the light we do.—After all, Gatty, Italy and France are the only countries to live in with freedom, ,
Is it not enough to drive one absolutely distrasted to loSe Such a divine fellow ? i—^No, never Shall this deteStable MiSs Sidney enjoy him whilst I am in being.
Do you know, ’my friend, I pity poor Lady Charlotte Richley from the bottom of my foul.—Ah ! unhappy deceived woman! Little, alas! do you
imagine
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	23I
imagine that your falSe betrothed Meb ville, whom probably you are pining after, is at this very moment rioting in bliSs with a kept-mijlrefs 1 Oh distraction !
Tuefday morni
Thus far I wrote yesterelay: after a miserable night, I am at length come to a final determination to See this girl.
“ But how ?” you alk.
• rU tell you.—I will go in a chaiSe to this little village called West-Green. I will, at Some inn there, leave my carriage for an hour or two. Saunter into the village, and paSs by the houSe of this old vile procureSs, Mrs.Nelfon. I will just then be taken ill, knock at the door for a glaSs of water, be very faint, and beg to fit down in the houSe a few - 'moments.—Now do you begin to comprehend my Scheme ?
But
23'2	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
But this, this is nothing to my future plot of revenge I am now meditating,
-—and of which I will inform you in my next. By this visit I now mention, I Shall have the pleaSure of gratifying my revenge in confronting this odious man and his fine lady, and of Shewing him I have detected him in his haunts.
“ Good Heavens ! Colonel Melville I —Shall I fay, innocently fmiling, whilst my heart is bursting with revenge, “ who should have thought of feeingyou here? upon my word it is a pretty situation. -—Do yoMlodge here?—have they more lodgings to lett? Truly I should like vastly, for a little fresh country air, to take an apartment here..
Thus, child, do I intend to teafe the once dear fellow, but now he is abfo-lutely my averfon^ I will be a- thorn in his side for the preSent; but I have a glorious project of mifchief m. agitation for a future day ; which, I hope,Fefore one month is at an end, to fee com-
pleated.
\
A LESSOSt FOR LOVERS.	2'3 g
pleated.—But I will not anticipate. You Shall know all in my next; in the mean time wish me good fucceSs.—I do love a little revenge at my heart.-— Wish every Demon, from his gloomy abode, may aid and ashSt in the vengeance she is meditating,
Your plotting friend,
K. FREELOVE.
LETTER XXL
MRS. HANNAH COMBS TO MISS CLIFTON.
Honoured Madam,
__ _	Fath, June
XilOW shall I begin my shocking Siiory, having the Sad news to impart, that my poor lady now lays d^ad of a violent putrid fever, after three days illneSs ? She expired this morning, in the greatest agonies, about four oYlock, and left me a difconSolate miferable woman;
for
234	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
.for I fuppofe, dying So Suddenly, there is no will.
I am but a poor Scribe ; but if you will ' excuSe the bad writing, and worSe inditing, I will try to put down the Sad iliocking particulars as well as I am able.
On Thursday morning last: my lady’s French woman being; Sent to London onSomeTecretbuSinefs—for fecretsKiX la^ dies have, to be Sure;—I waited entirely upon my lady in her abSence.
“ Combs,” Said She, “ I am going this morning a little airing to West-Green,” I think She call’d the place,*. “ and you may go with me.” .
I thought She Seemed in a grave humour, and nothing I could do- would pleafe her.—We Set out and got to' the village Safe; but,as ill luck would have it, had the great misfortune of being overturned just at the entrance of the place.—I Strained my wrist, and broke my shin—but my lady received no hurt: however, as it rained very hard, and as
there
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	235
there was, luckily, a poor Sort of farm hoLife juft by, my lady ran into it to eScape the Shower.—I went with her into a back room, where wxre a woman and two boys all extremely ill of a pu-tnd fever :—the woman and one of her boys Seemed near death, and lay on a low bed near the fire. It rained full an hour, all which time we Stayed there, and there my poor lady caught her death to he Sure.—But to go on with ■ my Sad story.
The weather clearing up, my lady Said She would walk down into the village leaving me to go to the chaiSe, and wait for her, as She Said she would be back in an hour.—I could not imagine where she was going.—To be Sure I have a little ctmofity^ as all womens I believe, have.
Out she Set by herfelf, and I went to -- See about the chaiSe : in about an hour my lady returned Seemingly much out of temper, having, she Said, lost her labour ;
236	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
bour; for that thofe she went to See were gone out for the day.—Unfortunately too, she was aim oft thorough wet, it having again, rained.— She feenied ^uite out of forts.—We got home in good time, but my poor lady could eat no dinner. At night she complained of being very ill, and tlie next day was in a high fever. The physician Said it was a putrid, very dangerous difeafe. She continued still worfe, and was then given over. She laid in great agonies, and was very light-headed, raved continually about a Lady Charlotte—I think that was her name—and a wedding in Ireland.—I don’t know what she could have in her head—but she often talked about West-Green.
To make short this shocking story, she called me to her a few minutes be-fore she died,—faid I was Mifs Sidney, and fereaming out, cried, “ Donst you fee thofe frightful Spectres that are
come
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	237
come to Se'ize.me faying which, fhe Sell into great agonies, and expired immediately.—She is, I am Sorry to Say, a very ghastly corpSe, as fhe died in great agonies :—the Lord have mercy on her poor foul!—I think fhe had fome very particular affair in hand, but that /he best knew.
I have wrote to her' uncle, and I hope he will do Something for me, as, to be Sure, for twelve years I have lived under the French woman a very discontented life ; no vails—no perquiSites!
Hoping, good Madam, you will ex-cufe this very fad and bad Scrawl, 1 remain (and beg you will confider my distreSs) your
Most Sorrowful, astlided, deSpairing humble Servant,
to command,
HANNAH COMBS
Thus did the vile Mifs Freelove fall a vidim to revenge, falfhood, vanity,
and
238	A LESSON FOR LOVERS*
and malice.—May the idle and vain of her Sex, however high their rank, Shun her vices, lest they meet the end She did, and which She justly merited!
Colonel Melville, who could not polfibly divine that his letters had been intercepted from Ireland, was extemely furpnSed he heard nothing from Lord Richley :—he SuppoSed, however, from, his filence, that worthy friend might be most likely, now. Soon intend-ing to re-vifit England ; therefore, being uncertain where to find him, omitted writing to Ireland.'—The reader will imagine (as the Colonel firmly believed Lady Charlotte Richley was now the wife of another man) that he entirely attached himfelf to his beloved Fanny; their hearts had long been united ; and he now began to prefs for an early day to complete his happinefs— which thefe happy lovers had partly fixed to be Soon after the marriage of
Sir
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	239
Sir Henry Bellmour, from whom they had received a most kind invitation.
In the mean time, Lady Charlotte, all tender,-affectionate,-and whoSe whole foul was devoted to her Melville, whom fhe passionately loved, was under the greatest anxiety for his health and life; dreading, from his Silence, all that the most tender fears could fuggest. That amiable lady had received two or three propofals of marriage, from noblemen of great ment and fortune :—but her
O
heart was too firmly attached to Colonel Melville not to reject them instantly. She continued to correfpond with her agreeable friend Mifs Bland-ford, and frequently defired her to fend what fubjects for amufement she could . find to entertain her dejected Spirits. —That kind friend foon granted her request, as will appear from the following letter.
L E T^
2^0	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
LETTER XXII.
MISS BLANDFCRiy, TO LADY CHARLOTTE RICHLEY, IN IRELAND.
H	South-Gro’ur, June i8/h.
OW^ absolutely imncceffary, my dearest friend, is your kind injunction that I stiould “ write Soon—very Soon,”—when it is giving my Self the greatest pleafurelcanknowin this cruel abSence from the friend of my heart! —For heavenfake tell me when Lord Richley talks of returning. My fatience., like Some other virtues, is tir’d, and almost exhausted.—I have a thouSand things to communicate :— particularly, that if you do not come to England Soon, probably you will no longer find there a Lucy Blandford.— You start—perhaps flie may, however, - be found in Lady Willis. In Short, platonic lovers^ I fancy, will Soon be
at
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	24I
at liberty to be more intimately united: that formidable word love^ which 1 had absolutely banished, is at length recalled. You have heard, doubtleSs, be-Sides, by my lait letter that Lore!
M----- ■— is really no more, and that his
heir has taken the title and eSbate, <lx. Sir Edward Willis, too, has every rea-Son to believe his betrothed lady is no longer in the land of the living : but a few weeks will Soon change doubt into certainty; as he has diSpatched a friend purpofely to the West Indies to gain the real truth.
You See this, my Charlotte, dated from a Sweet villa of my father’s, in the wild of Suffex :—the Situation delightfully romantic. We have been here near a fortnight; in v/hich time I have Spent whole days in rambling through copSes, woods, and enamelled meadows. In one of theSe agreeable excursions,
* This letter does not appear.
VOL. I.	L	I met
C/^2	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
I met with--------not a lover, child-—
an adventure, that though diSfresting has been fingularly pleaSing; and of winch I will gwe a full account.
A few davs since I Set out on a walk, and having wandered near half a mile, Sound myfelf near the Summit of a hill: a situation So beautifully -romantic I had fcarce ever before beheld.
“ For nature here—
“ W^anton’d as in her prime, and play’d at will “ Her virgin fancies.—
Wild above rule, or art, and beauteous, form’d
A happy, rural Scene of various views.”
Whilsi; I was contemplating this aS-femblage of rural beauties, which the divine Author of all elegance and per-feflion had So lavishly poured around, I efpyed at the end of a little winding - path, almost overgrown with hazel, and other copice wood, a low straw-rooffed cottage, or rather a miferable hut. A fmall quick-fet hedge, neatly cut, and a few stones before the door,
white
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	243
white as Snow, led me to believe the owner of this little homely mansion, poffeffed tieatnefs., however opprefifed with poverty.
Whilst I was Standinp- at the wicket that opened to this peaceful abode, my attention was ctawn to the found of the voices of children ; when at length I deferred two of the most lovely girls, sitting under a goofeberry bush, I had ever beheld.—From their exact similitude to each other, they appeared to be twins of the age of about five years.—I obferved, fuch was their like-nefs to each other, that there was a Small bit of red ribbon tied^ round the wrist of each: their drefs tbo, which was as plain and coarfe as poshble,
' though perfectly clean, was exactly a-like. I obferved they were both knitting, which led me to believe the parents of thefe pretty children must be themSelves iiidustnous, who could initiate their little ones, at So early L 2	an
244	LESSON FOR LOVERS.
an age, into So uSeful an employment. They were however playful in the midst of their wmrk, and Sung and laughed alternately.—-T'hey had not observed me, as I was almost hid by a large apple tree, behind which I stood.
YShilst I was making many reflections on the beauty, the innocence, and cheerfulnefs of thefe pretty children, my attention from them was drawn to the most amiable young woman I ever beheld, who came out of the cottage with two Small bafons of milk, and a crust of brown bread in a broken plate. She advanced to the children, whofe mother, though fo young, I found She ' was, from her manner of addreffing them. She appeared pale and emaciated, with a fixed melancholy in her countenance, which was really lovely, notwithstanding a sickly hue. Her drefs was that of a peafant, and her hair, which appeared to be very fine, was bound up under a little clean coif.
My
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	245
My hiding-place entirely Screened me from all observation, and 1 heard her addrefs the children thus:
“ Well, my dears, I have brought your dinner :—but I fear you have both been very idle.—You, Sophia, have been purfuing butterflies this whole morning:-—and you, LouiSa, have been looking for a bird’s nest.— Fye,—fye, the knitting goes Sadly on I find.”
“ Indeed—indeed mamma—(Said the fw'cet girls both in a breath)—my Stocking is almost done, and So is my Sister’s.—Indeed we have been very good.—I will tell the truth that I did run after one butterfly, but I would not kill it, believe me, I would not: SiSeer Sophy never took a bird’s nest in her life ; did you Sophy ?”
' I, who you know, am fo fond of nature in its purest State, was delighted with tliis Scene.
L 3	‘‘Well,
2^6	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
“ Well, my dear children (Said the amiable mother, fitting down on the graSs, -and tenderly taking them in her arms, alternately kisting each) well—-I believe you—I must never have you kill thoSe pretty birds that Sing So Sweetly,—nor any thing in Sport:— the Same good God that made you made them.—Come, eat your dinner, and be thankful you have it.”—Saying which she retired.
Her words, her manner, and the whole of her deportment convinced me she was a perfon who had known better days. My heart yearned to relieve her; for poor she certainly appeared to be—her hushand, I SuppoSed, was a day labourer.
Now, the grand point w'as, how I should introduce my Self. The Scheme of defiring to fit dowm to rest me a few minutes in the cottage, after a very long walk. Seemed the moSt feasible plan I could six on.—I therefore opened
the
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	247
the little wicket, and walked up the path to the cottage, and gently tapped at the door, which however stood wide open, for as Imogen Says,
“ Poor houfe, it kept ii/e//.”
No perfon whatever appearing, I turned back into the garden to the children whom I kiffed, and gave a few trinkets out of my pocket to play with.
“ Where is your mother, my dears, ashed I, is (he at dinner
“ No,’^ Said one of the Sweet girls, “ fhe very Seldom has any dinner, except when fhe can get milk.—^She’s poor now,—but I remember She told me -I once had a fine white frock ;— and So had my Sister.—My mamma Spins now, and Fje knit:—must do Something to helpP
< “ My God 1” exclaimed I, and was wonderfully affected to hear thefe little innocents imagine their knitting could go towards their Support, in the num-L 4	ber
2J/S	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
bcr of articles that are neceffary to Sub-fill a family.
“ And where is your father, my pretty dears,” laid I.
“ We never had a father,” anfwer-ed one of thefe lovely babes.
“ Yes, iiftcr Sophy,” faid the other,
we had a father,-—but you know, mamma fays, if w^e talk of him we fliall make her cry for he is gone—^gone a great way off.”
Whilst they were Speaking, their mother came to us :—and curtfying with great refpect, and with even an air of politenefs, wdiilst a faint biuSh overspread her languid cheek, begg’d to know if I had any commands with her.
I told her that having fatigued my-felf wsith walking, I would be mueh obliged to her, if fhe would give me leave to fit down a few moments in her houfe.
You
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	249
“ You do me honour,” Said she,
Madam:—my poor hut is indeed a miserable one ;—but you are heartily , welcome.”
There was Something in her manner which astonished me:—an elegance, I may Say, which nothing could diS-guiSe.
We were now arrived at the houSe »■—wshich indeed Seemed even the abode of poverty itSelf:—an old chair, in which I Seated myfelf, a broken table, and a Spinning wheel. Seemed the whole of the furniture.—7’he floor was, however, perfectly clean; and there was a neatneSs throughout. I felt myfelf Somewhat difconcerted:—and though I was convinced the amiable woman before me was poor to the lowest degree, I would not on that very account, methought, shock her delicacy, by an abrupt manner of relieving her distreSs,
V/ho knows, thought 1, but this per-fon may once have lived in the affluence
I do,
2^0.	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
I do, and that postibly She may be as much, or more entitled to reSpect ?
“ I fancy,’’ Said 1, after a short pauSe,
“ you was Spinning before I came in:—
I beg I may not hinder you.—Do you Spin much ?”
“ Yes, Madani',—I have nozu no other means to Support mySelf and thoSe poor children in the garden, and I have not a very quick hand at it So that we often”----
She stopped—stie blushed.—I was visibly affected.
Have you lived here long ?—The Situation of your houSe is remarkably pleafant.”
“ 1 have been here about half a year, and am quite pleafed with my cottage (looking round her with a kind of half languid Smile) and begin to think that health, and, I thank God, I am better than I have been, with a disposition to be pleafed, will make any situation reconcilable.—I have known the' world:
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	2SI
—a difficult Science to thoSe in prosperity, but to the wretched an eaSy leS-fon."
She paufed.
I was astonished at her manner of expression, and I could not Supprefs the rising tear.—I took out my handkerchief, and wiped it away.
“ I tried (Said she with an air of modest diffidence) to take in plain-work,
‘ but being a stranger, no-one would employ me:—the fame objection I found . too in regard to Setting up a little School.”
“ That,” returned I, “ could you have effected it, would have been an eligible Scheme.”
“ I can bear poverty my Self, madam, and God preServe me from a greater misfortune than that of being poor.—I have not occasion for a great degree of resignation to Support poverty ; little is wanting for the real neceffanes of life, when we are capable of defpising ima-
ginary
2^2	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
ginary wants.—It is for my children ■ alone, I feel:—’ds there, I find, I am wretched :—Heaven I trust will preserve them.”
“ They, indeed, are lovely babes,” ' Said I, wiping a tear that wotdd steal down my cheek ; I Shall often call to See them and yourfelf.”
She bowed reSpectfully.
I was now contriving how I could flip a Small prefent into her hand.
“ I think,” Said I, “ I will come and drink a Syllabub to morrow evening in this Sweet Spot.”—looking into the garden.—“ Accept, pray, of that trifle for the ingredients.”—throwing on the table a guinea.
The poor woman, aStoniShed, burSt into tears.
“ O Madam 1 fhe could only Say,
“ is it poJJthleV'
I hurried away as fast as I c6uld, to hide my SenSibility, which indeed was ^ much excited.
As
9
<
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	253
As I walked home, I found a strong desire to be farther act]uainted with this poor amiable young perfon ; who, I was convinced, had not only Seen bet-better days, but must, from that peculiar elegance of manner and Sentiment She discovered, have been born and bred in a very genteel Sphere of life. Heavens! Said I to myfelf, what must shave been her Sufferings!—her helplefs infants too!—I am happy, however, that I have at length diScovered this poor family.
On my arrival at home, I ordered a large bafket of meat, bread, wine. Some tea and Sugar to be packed up, and Sent immediately to the cottage. I Should here tell you* I ashed her name on my leaving her, faying, “ Pray who must I encj^uire for?”
“ They call me,” Said the amiable 0 young woman, blushing, ‘‘ Dame Hopkins,”
Her
I
2^4	^ LESSON FOR LOVERS.
Her manner in Saying this, led me to fuppofe it was not her ra/ name.
I waited impatiently for the hour of going to the cot of this poor dame Hopkins ; as impatiently, my dear friend, as Some fine ladies, wshom you and I know, would have done to have gone to Lady B—’s rout, or to a maS-qued ball, at Comely’s.
At length the hour arrived, and I Soon reached the little obfcure habita-tation. The two lovely children ran out to meet "me, their Shining eyes Sparkling with joy at my approach.— Such is pure, uncorrupt nature, in its early State. “ Mamma, mamma, they cried, “ here is the good lady come, come to See poor mamma,” and fondly kiffed my hands, in a transport of joy.
O, my dear, what do the fcijhionahle ^ part of our fex loSe by not enjoying Scenes like thefe 1 I could not contain my tears, fo exc^uiSite w^as my delight;
but
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	2 f S
^ D
but they were tears of extreme pleasure.
Whilst I was indtdgitig my Senfibility with theSe little angels, the lovely mother herSelf appeared. I could Scarce restrain her from falling at my feet in a tranfport of gratitude.
* “ O Madam, let my tears—let my childreiVs tears—Speak our feelings.’' The day being very warm,- and as I had before told her, I should chufe the-Syllabub, I had mentioned, in the garden, she conducted me to a rustic bench under an old oak, wdiich she had rendered the Sweetest Spot you can conceive :—here, indeed, she had shewn that she must have tdjle. In short, all I Saw still heightened my extreme curiosity to know who and what this little family had been.
The amiable wDman, I found, had the whole day been employed in adorning this beautiful Spot for my reception, She had twisted branches of
Sweet
¥ ‘
256	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
Sweet-briar, round the Scat oh which I was to fit, interniiugled with honey-Suckles, whilst the pretty cliildren, I found, had been employed in Strewing the graiSy carpet under my feet with flowers, as they likewife had the path, wliich led to this rural Seat. A little board was nailed up in form of a table, over w’hich was Ipread a cloth, white as the driven Snow: the Syllabub was placed ready, with the addition of a plate of wood-ftrawberries, and Some other rural fruit, the production of the neiglshouring copSe.
“ I Shall fancy myfelf, Mrs. Hopkins,” Said 1, Smiling, and Seating mySelf, “ in a kind of terreStisial paradiSe, with theSe little angels by my fide. Indeed you have Sliewn that you have a taste for rural beautyand I was going to add, as well as for elegance; but I check’d mySelf, fearing it would remind her of a better state, in which I
was convinced, till Some very grievous
misfortune
A' LESSON FOR LOVERS.	257
misSortune had befallen, her, she had before been accustomed to. To confirm me entirely in this belief, I Secretly discovered her handkerchief, and other parts of her linen to be of remarkable fineneSs.
Dunng the most agreeable repast I ever partook of, which was still heightened by the balmy fragrance of a field of blooming beans adjoining, and by the delightful melody of a neighbouring thrush,
“ Whilst: fo loud the blackbird fung,
“ That the woods and vallies rung,”
I observed the lovely woman, for fo I must call her, often endeavoured to Supprefs the riSing tear.—I placed her Sweet crirls near me, on a bank of mild chamomile, and fed them from my hand, whilst I was delighted with their innocent prattle ;—for, unconfcious of form, or ceremony, they Sung, laughed, and talked withotit restraint.
‘‘ Sophia,”
258	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
“ Sophia,’' Said the fond mother, with the teiiderest accent, ‘‘ you must not prate So fast. My dear children, little girls fhould be Seen and not heard.”
“ I am delighted with their innocent prattle—indeed with all I See and hear.—You, Mrs. Hopkins,” looking upon her with, I believe, a particular anxious curiosity, “ attract likewiSe my sincere regard,”
She was affected.
“ I Should excite your pity too, good Madam,” She modestly replied, “ were it posiible you could know my Sufferings.—They have been great;—but I trust my resignation is ec[ual to my lot, have been unhappyy—but I am in-' dined to think when we are/c, we too often deferve it.—Hov/ever, I am convinced (after Some little paufe) human happineSs does not depend on any degree of ft at ion y or on any external circumstance whatever.”
“ It
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	2 £J9
“ It is true,” returned I.	But,
* notwithstanding, I find my Self strangely interested in your distreffes.—Poffn bly, I may, in Some reSpedts, be able to render you a little Service :—I would not pain you, Mrs. Hopkins, by a recital of your misfortunes:—and yet —methinks—I wish to know them.”
“ If you. Madam, “ she returned vdth inimitable Sweetnefs, “ will not ~ think a short account of my'Sufferings impertinent, I shall v/ith great pleasure inform you of the particulars of my life ; not, I thank Heaven, marked vbiih guilt.—I was born to affluence,— but amarriage—fatal in its effedts to me, has been my ruin.”
Here she wiped a falling tear from her pale cheek ; but having again affur-ed me the recital of her griefs could not now possibly add to them, and I having informed her I wifiied to hear her story—indeed I was "on the very _ tenter-hooks of womanish curiofity'—•
she
26o	a* lesson for lovers.
she paus’d for a few moments, as if recollecting her Scattered thoughts;— ''then Sweetly turning to the children, who were standing by,—“ Go, my Sophia,—go my LouiSa,—go to play on the green, and be Sure gather the finest noSegay of the Sweetest flowers for this lady.—You are too young yet, my poor babes, to listen to the fate that has, and will involve your future days in poverty and its train of evils.”
/
End of Volume I.
.. . ' -N	\	‘‘	.	^ •-■■- ■ J
- "C A:-; ,N. . !
. ' . ^	•	'	■ •- ' V ■	^ i
t... >>:	N -C.N-
;.D^. ■	• ■' 'T -■■ ■-'To:■ ’	T^" -'
. r" : .V : ' ■ .	-■ ' .	■ ■	■■.	^	,r
' -^LLmy ■■■-''	■ ii ■ ■	' c, ■■	.	■' 1
■ -'D ■	•-, ■	■
‘	' "V	) \	'".'	,	-	.	. 'b
•»'	^	'	-^ ■'■	' 'i
.. » ' ' ' • • ■ ; ^
'• ■' - . - • "■
-	'	-	.;	'A-	■.	-'T'	‘	"	- .	■■
■	•,	■ >	•-	V ‘
' '''. "■ • .
■ ■ iff 'ri -	' '	'
■	hi' ' • -^■■■'--■	. ■	■ .' ;S-
^ ' . ■' ■ ■' ■ ■'■.
■	V ■ NV^cV ■' N , N 1
T: '	' ■■• '■. N	'■ ■ ’	'■
f 4*>	•-	•	-i-'
■■ , ^. ./	■■	,, .’ V, ,
' ■vN'-c: - /	, .,;,vcsh :h-
‘ ■ "■	'	*■	'	,	b'S-S-' '• A.
> ■ ■■ .': •	-■	;’-C '■
■':■	'.'■ ■ v'”v ■'■ TV.:..,':,,:.
-''■N,,:, ■ ^ -CSV;',. ■ .■	VC
■-■ ."■'S’'■ •i.-	‘;-v';-N t"' ' ■■•■'t '''i . 's. * ■ . ■	. , '	.ri
■' ^ 'S' ' ' ' "' ' ' ■'
.#* d. .	'■ t	'■	i..' N
'•	-	'. ' :,i'.;	■	, ■ ■•	, ,	.	"*	V, v.'r*.
fic-v,
$S: " ■ '''," ^
C_	'n ■	:	'	• ■	•“
I./'	'
. . , ■ ■■ - V '
■ '^'C-
- ^	(I ;
3?f| ,CC '- '	- -
Ml -
Ldl f^ ‘ . ' -	/:
f ^ ^ S v: I ^	,	; .
T ' ‘ •■	'	■	■■	■	■' '	'
K	( ri- .	:.ct- i >
•. ■-	. ■
' h ■
■ A ■ • , . ,
t '	/■ ‘ S	;
[r • , ■ . '•*
I ■	■ . ■	•	■
■ i
**
'y'.f	'	^	'' ' '
N	•	. .	•	■ >' j
, • '	<• A
' N " h ■.
iS ■*	‘ , ■ '	. ^ ■ h ‘ifxj
'N ■
'''	f
^HH
1 ^
.y, ■' '■	'XO-'-	^
'’‘'■^ SN
.^1^\ '	--C/, ^/j-.-:,rL i'*”'i-'-T"-/-" •'••-■■	f
'XX	' ]
: ■ ■ . m:'	S *( if '"^1
tL,Ca\
tS' -i ->i !■
‘'■V-;	,;'.	■	■	.	-
■ "h ui:- ^i ’4' "'.
' ■ I d' I '^'
' f
llpl
rV'E .

♦
1
.4
^ i '	■	■	•
'Ml
. .gip
823	Li 557 ^
""L'-	V.2
y .	__________
THE
GODFREY F. SINGER MEMORIAL PRESENTED BY
MR. AND MRS. JACOB SINGER
\y
' ■ w
%
■ '. ^' -	*	■ ■ i
* ^
A
, ^
L E S S OF. ,
■ V- '
■i
FOR
LOVERS.
VOL. II.
/
;-r., ‘
te’’ ■ ^w
'iv	'	’	*5	.	-	'•'■•■'
--„•	'	■ ri ri ~'ZWA/-
■ '	•	-^	'’dvt ■'■'.■ 'ri' :■
'-Vi .; ,W • :a I C. :. A" ^	.,
' •■ ■ . . ■. ■ •■ f. ’'■■■"	'	*	• ;: :T t’.'-''	' '	■■ ■/.■
|T.c,.........-N-	■	;:	--..Dv
fffFA ■. • :	;	.	,	• _ s ,, X
. .D ' ■ 'cs ’ yri 'f'A ssi' .'sT'L
S&r. L. v'h : ••>'■ ” ,'	.'•'‘'t'- VV	'■. -‘^L:
* L-, .if	V W '	^ : ■_-. \.-d^
-■ . ' -	' ■ • S '■	^	' ■'• ■'•
"it- :' • '	.	'i . , L. ■ . ,t	. •:- - :
irv,j-/'-.	■	■■r! ■* i	' -‘i	■■	•	-
-V,'
0fFri	■■ ::■■■ ---i'N' t
'	'	A
' LESSON FOR LOVERS,
OR THE
HISTORY
O F
COLONEL MELVILLE,
AND
LADY CHARLOTTE RICHLEY.
VOLUME II.
___ j
i
LONDON:	|
r
PRINTED FOR FRANCIS NOBLE, AT HIS CIRCULATING library, opposite GRAYS-INN-GATE,
HOLBORN. M,DCC,LXXXIII.
m
*	'	• y ' ' ' . • , ‘ '	rA;.-
•	- •	N:li ,	.	:	- ii
'v-' ^
, . ^	, T 'V	^
. ■■	- r' L, ■
- ■ 'Vhiri •
'T ••V'T'' T ■	,1 'J	■
S' '	i7'“'h-''-L ■' ' ■■	' '	'	‘	■ . ■■
'	’:VS;
>■■	' :	L	' . -
:|v r^;.- y ;' - c'cViTN ■ ■';■/■ \‘v: Sv’'-'•;■ ^■; V -, - >■
■■ i-'CNS*TXLTlCC;viA';V^	r-er&rr:X	' 'V. '
' 'W:.i i ■ •■ '^ ■'	' LT«,i
mcv-. ■■ -ii
iw«; -
00-3
L E S S O N
FOR.
LOVERS.
iMISS, BLANDFORD IN CONTINUATION.
THE HISTORY OF MRS. HOPKINS.
"f A riiEN Mrs. Hopkins’s children I ^ ^ were departed, the amiable I - woman recited her narrative in the L following words:	*	‘
1^' “ I am the only child of a'gem Ptleman of large fortune in the west,
C,of England, whofe ancestors, as well as PhimSelf, were remarkable' for their un« te Shaken honour and hoSpitality, and for O ‘-^Spending in their family manfion, a igvery ancient feat, a clear estate of two inthouSand pounds per annum, in every feact which private charity, or gentility	d
jc of life, among his neighbourhood, could VOL. II	B	dictate.
I	.V "
6	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
dictate. To fay he was barely beloved, perhaps is not giving a Sufficient testimony of his merit;—I may indeed Say, he was almost adored.”
Here she wiped the trickling tear that rivoiM Steal its way.
“ I fear,” Said I, interrupting her, ‘‘ you have undertaken a taste which will be too much Sor your tender Sen-Sibility of heart:—I will defer my curiosity to Some future period.”
“ No, dearest Madam, I will now, if you pleaSe, proceed.
“ I lost my mother at a very early age, and received my education, till I arrived at the years of twelve, under a maiden aunt, who came to reside at the abbey (Sor So was my father’s Seat called) on the .death of my mother. This worthy relation (my aunt) I had alSo the misfortune to loSe at the above-mentioned age, which is perhaps one of the most critical in the life of our Sex. Our manners, our Sentiments are
then
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	7
then forming apace, and require the utmost attention to direct and manage.
“ As my dear father perfectly doat-ed on me, he was rather embarraffed in the plan of education he should piir-Sue, to perfect me in the various accomplishments in which I had been initiated. He, who lived quite in the style of an English country gentleman, detested the thought of introducing a French governeSs to Superintend my education; and our remote distance from masters in the Science of dancing, mufic, &c.. made him at length determine to place me at a very capital boarding-School, in a large city, in the fame county we lived. At this School my father was pleaSed to think I made many improvements: and there I continued till I had attained my stxteenth year.
“ My father beheld me, on my return home, with a kind of rapture, which paternal fondneSs can only experience.
B 2	As
8	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
As I was tall and womanh: of my age; 1 was made to preside at the head of his table ;—and in Short to be quite the mistreSs of the abbey. Happy period!
‘‘ I employed great part of my time at my harpsichord, my pencil, and needle; but above all my amufements I was fond of reading. Unfortunately I had a tasie for romances and novels, and my aunt had, among her collection of books, the whole of which She had bequeathed me, a great number of thofe works of imagination.—I {2.J unfortunately I was"fond of works of the above kind; for 1 am convinced, tho’ they were all of the, besi: authors we have in the English language, in that •department of literary amufement, yet They certainly, though they did not corrupt my heart, or deprave my mo> r2\s,foftened my mind to a dangerous degree, and made it, I verily believe, too SuSceptibie of receiving an impref-
fion
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	9
fion Soon afterwards, which (she continued Sighing bitterly) was eventually the cauSe of niy ruin.—But to proceed ' in my story.
“ I had much leiSure, wvas always fond of retirement, and as I was wholly mistreSs of mySelf and my time, I devoted hours every day to the peruSal of thefe too agreeable studies.
“ My father, who was high-sheriff for the county, a juftice of peace, and engaged in other public offices, was often from home. One morning, particularly, he Set out for the quarter Seshons, which he always attended, and I indulged my Self the whole day in reading in the garden a favourite romance.—The eveningbeingyemarkably ~	^
fine, in the month of June, I walked on a terrace, which overlooked the avenue from the park, in expectation of -feeing my beloved parent arrive ;—but instead of him, to my affright, I efpied one of the Servants, who had gone with B 3	him
lO	-A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
him in the morning, riding with all fpeed towards the houSe.
“ For Heaven’s Sake, Said I, Peter, what is the matter.^ where is your maS- ^ ter ?—has any bad accident happened ?”
‘‘ Be not alarmed. Madam, he replied, nothing has happened. Heaven be praiSed, to my master; but a poor gentleman, I believe, is killed, in endeavouring to reScue him from a highwayman we met with just now on the great heath that leads to the park.”
“ You terrify me to death. Said I.—
But is my father indeed Safe V
“ Yes, indeed. Madam. I have left Robert, my fellow Servant, to attend him and the poor gentleman who acted So bravely, but fear he has breathed his last.—Good God 1 with what courage did he knock the pistol from my master’s breast; whilst, like lightening, he stew to his fuccour!—but, alas ! in the fcustle, the highwayman fired another pistol at my master’s deliverer,
and
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	II
and 'down he fell dead, as I SuppoSe :— a dreadful gash in his head, beSides, from the fall,—-I am come home to order the chariot to bring him gently to the abbey:—my good master stands by him, holding his bleeding head. Indeed he owes his life to him, though he has lost his own:—for I believe he is certainly dead.”
“ O Heavens ! exclaimed I, poor un-happy gentleman!”
“ A thoufand ideas that instant rushed into my mind, which I had picked up in my romances, of a father rescued from death by a brave deliverer, who had nobly risttued his own life to Save him. Run, Peter, faid I, and order the chariot to be made ready immediately.*—I will myfelf inform the houfe-keeper to fee that a bed be prepared.—-I did fo—and ashsted her in tearing fine linnen for bandages, Sec, against the Surgeons arrived; a meS-fenger being ordered to Set off directly, B 4	by
12	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
by my father’s direction, to bring two as Soon as pofiible.
“ When I Saw every thing was in order, I hastened to the terrace, and waited Some time, but Saw neither the chanot return, nor my father.
“ This, in good truth. Said I to my Self, is indeed an adventure !—A father delivered from the hand of a mercileSs robber,—a gallant stranger riSqning his life,—wounded—and perhaps killed in the rencounter, and brought in that state to the houSe of him whom he had reScued !-—Surely, theSe circumstances are equaPy marvellous with any to be found in the annals of fiction.
“ This little period of time before the carriage returned, was certainly prejudicial to my future repofe ; as by recollecting an hundred familiar instances from my books, my mind was Softened to an high degree of fuSceptibi. Yity.
“ At
A-LESSON FOR LOVERS.	13
“At length I deScried a kind of melancholy procefiion advance up the avenue : my father riding flowly on horfeback, the chariot following, and Several men bringing up the rear. I Still remained on the terrace, where I obferved a kind of bier was carried to the chanot door, in order to bring the wounded gentleman through the garden, a nearer way to the houSe : lix men having laid the gallant ftranger gently on this conveyance, ativanced to the garden, in which I Stood. My dear father beinu alighted from his
o o
horSe—I ran—I stew to welcome his Safety and arrival:—I hung on my beloved parent’s neck :-1 wept with
py"
“ Oh ! my Sophia, Said he, what do 'ive not owe to that poor gentleman I —I hope you have ordered the best bed; as nothing stiall be wanting 911 my part for his recovery. But alas ! —alas! in Saving ly life, he has, I B 5	fear,
14 'A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
fear, lost, or will in a few hours lofe his own I—Never did I See Such undaunted courage—Such matchlefs intrepidity as the gallant youth (an entire stranger to me, my Sophy) Shewed your poor father.-—Are the Surgeons yet come
“ Before I could anSwer—my whole attention was drawn to the most affecting fight in nature, or at least Such then it appeared to me.
“ The bier pasted stowly by me, on which was laid the dying Stranger, though to me he appeared already dead:—and yet never had I before Seen So lovely a figure.—A countenance, though pale, yet handSome in the extreme :—tall, finely formed, and drest with equal elegance and neatneSs.—His eyes were cloSed, as if in death:—his fine hair, dark and stowing, hung care-leSsly over his forehead, on which I Spied a large wound, through which
stream of blood stowed plentifully.—-
My ,
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	1 $
My young heart, unnSed to fights like theSe, was throbbing, at an object So piteous.—I felt my Self strangely agitated.
I longed—and yet custom forbade, to be one of his astistants to the apartment allotted him :—the Servants, and my father, all attended, and he was . laid in the bed:—but all this time, it Seems he had not Spoken a word.— But am I not,Madam,” Said the amiable Mrs. Hopkins, “ am I not too minute in my account of this incident the circumstances dwell strongly on my mind.”
I afSured her I was delighted with the manner of her recital, and begged her to continue to be as minute as poS-sible,—“ The minutia, added I, are in fact, highly neceffary in theSe cafes. . As the finest traits, the almost imperceptible touches of the pencil, give a-likeneSs to a picture, So do the workings of the moft delicate Senfations of the human heart on the most fa?niliaf''
occurrences
16	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
occurrences of life, hejl convey an idea of the Sentiments and dispositions of the mind. We are all liable to ‘the fame pasiions, but it is the various degrees and operations of them, that esharactenze and distinguish the Several perSons :—pray then, dear Madam, continued I, looking affectionately on her, (for indeed my heart yearned to asiist her) I befeech you not to be lefs minute.—I could hear you for an age.’^
She bowed—and continued.
“ The Surgeons did not arrive till a late hour ; and my father—poor good man!—fat up with the stranger and Servants, the chief part of the night.— I, girl-Iike.,—but what could be expected from a girl of sixteen .? ran to the door of the sick gentleman, and ashed every one v/ho came out, if the stranger-, who had So nobly Saved my father’s life, S thd't circumjiance dwelt Strongly on my young mind) was yet apparently dead.?—At length, I was informed
' -	fcy
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	17
by my’ father that the Surgeons were of opinion, if the ball, which had pasted into his right Side, could be extracted, and his arm, (wdiich it Seems was broke, and which I had not heard of befo^'e) could be Set properly, being terribly^ bruiSed; and if the contufions in various parts of his body, as well as head, could be found not to be So bad as they^ then imagined, he might, in time., recover.
“ He is a fine young man, added my father, and is certainly in a genteel Sphere of life.—His dreSs, his elegant watch, his fine horSe; in Short, his whole appearance, confirms this belief."
“ Had he no Servant with him V aSked I.—“ No," replied he.—“ I fancy he was coming from the races. He happened to be riding over the heath, just as the villain of a highwayman had clapped the pistol to my breast.—He flew like winged lightening t5 my aid, and a most dreadful fcustie enfued betwixt
l8	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
twixt him Bnd the miScreant who had aSTaulted me, and who, at last made off, I confeSs,” added my father “ I should be glad to know the name and family of my deliverer, that I might shew him every proper reSpect.”
“ In about two days, the Surgeons pronounced their patient Seemed in a fair way to have the ball extracted:— My father came to me, with joy to tell me (and with a joy I had never before experienced I heard it) that the gentleman had fpoken ; that he was quite fen-ffble ; and that he had even expreffed • gratitude for the care that had been taken of him.—But to proceed.
“ In about a week, there began to be every Symptom in his favour: he was ordered, however, to be kept quiet, to prevent a fever.-r-In the following week, he was So much better as to have my father fit wdth him an hour every day.—I longed, and yet I could not with much propriety, to ash a great
' - deal
A
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	I9
deal about him :—but my father fooii unalked, began the Subject of the Sick gentleman, (for So he was called throughout the houfe) as we were one morning at breakfaft.”
“ Upon my word, Said the good man, I am perfectly delighted with this amiable Siranger. I find his name is Douglas:—that is an ancient name —a great name.—(I Should here Say, that if my beloved parent had any foible^ it was that of fondneSs for pride of birth, and ancestry of family.) I have at length gathered from him, continued he, that he is nephew and heir to Sir Thomas Douglas, now in India :—a re-fpectable family you See, Sophy:—that he is a student at Oxford, nay, I think he Said he was a gentleman Commoner— but he is of the Same college I was.— He is really a fine young man.”
“ For a fortnight following, my father fat hours in the apartment, every day, of the wounded stranger, who
was
20	A LESSON FOR LOVERS,
was now entirely thought to be out of danger.—My dear parent talked of nobody, and of nothing elSe, but his fenSe, his learning (my father \vas him-felf an excellent Scholar) his wit and various accomplishments. In short, he was delighted with him, and the gallant incident which had brought him firSt acquainted, Strongly prepofTefSed him i« my father’s favour, as he poS-feffed a large share of gratitude, as well as every other generous principle. Qur houSe-keeper, too, was continually ringing in my ears the praiSes of the poor gentleman up Siairs.”
“ Have you not Seen him yet, Mifs Sophyshe would often Say; “ O he is the Sweetest man! So good natured! So handSome!”
“ In truth, I was almost talked into a prepoffeshon for Mr. Douglas before I had well Seen him, and the decorum, which custom preScnbes of not visiting a gentleman in his chamber, made me^
still
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	21
Still more impatient and anxious to behold again this agreeable Stranger.
“ At length, the fatal day vvasno w come that I was again to See him. Alas! by what a flender thread does our ha-pineSs, or mifery depend in this world! ^nd what lasting great effects Spring from the most trivial caufes !
“ One morning my father, after a thouSand encomiums bestowed on Mr. Douglas, Said, “ Sophia, we will drink our tea, child, this afternoon in his apartment :-yhe is now able to fit up and converSe :—it will be Some amuSe-ment to him:—therefore order your tea-equipage to be carried there.—You have no objection, I .preSume?”
“ No, certainly Sir,’' I faintly an-fwered, blushing like Scarlet.
‘‘ I well remember, I did not that day negleIt my drefs.—I was uneafy till the hour of tea arrived, and when it didg, my father led me to the apart-m«bjiit of Mr. Douglas,
“ Here
22	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
“ Here, my friend,” Said he, I have brought you a visiter.—My Sophia will thank you for your care of meS'
“ I shall, methinks, never forget thoSe words.
I curtsied, and, much confuSedf * stammered out,—“ much obliged— “ hoped he was better.”
“ Mr. Douglas was, perhaps, at that time, the most amiable object in the world :—notwithstanding his late ill* neSs, imagination can hardly form a finer figure.—He was reclined on a fort of couch,—his anil in a fling.—His eyes were piercing, expreshve, and yet full of SoftneSs.—There was a languor in his fine face inexprefsibly engaging:— a SweetneSs in his countenance, and yet a manly dignity.—But why should I dwell on beauties So fatal in the event ? —Suffice it to fay, his understanding uncommonly good, added to the most brilliant wit (Setting the graces of his
perfon
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	Sj
perfon afide), rendered him the most agreeable man on earth.—His knowledge for his years, which appeared not more than twenty-one, was alSo wonderful.
“ During tea, I Said but little : I, however, when I could steal a look at this very amiable man, observed I was not unnoticed by him. I even Saw, or fancied I Saw him regard me with particular attention. Soon after tea I left the room, my father being engaged with him in a very learned and critical diScourSe on the ancients and moderns.
When I retired to my apartment, I stghed, and felt an unufual weight at my heart.—I took up a volume of Rouffeau’s Eloifa., which happened to lay on the table, and imagined, in the Soft Scenes there defcribed, I read the character of Douglas in that of St.Prieux. —I retired to bed, but not to steep.
For
24	LESSON FOR LOVERS.	I
“ For a fortnight following, hardly fl a day pasted but my father and I drank I our tea with our agreeable guest, who I every day afforded freSh matter for our | esteem; as did his Senfe and manner j our admiration of his accomplishments, which were indeed many and great.— " His taste for music, poetry, and painting, was uncommonly good, and his Superior talents had been finely cultivated.
“ Whether Mr. Douglas Saw my growing attachment for him, I know not, but certain it is, I Saw many tokens and marks in him (Such as my novels had taught me) of a paffion in him for me ; and this, to a heart young as mine, tender, and romantic, encreaS-ed what I felt for him. It is true he had yet never given me any proofs of his. affection (my father being always preSent) any farther than the language of his exprellive eyes would permit,' but thofe Spoke pretty intelligibly.
“ My .
r	- A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	I5
f “ My dear excellent parent, was I perfectly infatuated with this amiable I young man :—and one morning I was I extremely furpnSed when meeting me in the garden,i—‘‘ Sophy, my dear,” Said he, “ come fit down in yonder arbour a Sew minutes:—I have a word for your ear.”
Being Seated, he thus began :
“ I am absolutely delighted with this Mr. Douglas:—what do you think oS him, Sophia —-tell me truly.”
“ I think—I think,” Said I excessively stuttered, “ that he is a man of good fenSe.”
“ Uncommonly So, rejoined my father. Then, after a Sliort paufe, he turned to me.—You know, my beloved child, my life is wrapt up in yours— all I have is yours,—and only yours.— My mofi: predominant wifii is, as I now grow old, to fee you married before I die, to Some worthy man,—of v/hom I myfelf have an opinion.”
« Oh
26	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
“ Oh Heavens! thought I, what is he going to fay ? my heart throbbing with unuSual perturbation.
“ Should the character—the family —the connexions of my brave, young deliverer, on a Jfnf} ettquiry, turn out what I wish, could you, my dear,— Speak freely,—think of him in future— (yt-prefetit^ the affair is quite out of the queStion)—but could you, I repeat, look upon him with a degree of partiality —Come, tell me.—I will be free to acknowledge I know no young man to whom I would So Soon give your hand. —What fay you ?”
“ I think. Sir, I think itt time I might be induced to think favourably of Mr. Douglas :—I might, perhaps, in future, have a partiality.’^
“ Imagine, Madam,” Said Mrs. Hopkins to me, “ my feelings on this occasion.—Alas 1 I then loved him to dif-traction!”
“ Say
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	27
“ Say no more—Say no more, my child,” Said my father, visibly pleaSed, “ I fhall, this very day, write to his tutor at Oxford, to enquire his character, family, and connexions ; without, however, acquainting him with my particular views.—Indeed it is proper I fhould know, at leaji who it is I have in my houSe.—But now, Sophia,” Said he very gravely, “ by all your duty to me, I charge you most folemnly., till you receive my fanBion for it, not to listen, directly or indirectly, to any kind of compliments^ or little cuStoinary encomiums, which fuch polite young gentlemen as our guest is, are continually making your fex:—I fay, look on them only as mere words of courSe : and let this little difcourSe of ours be as if it never had been.—We know not yet, my dear, what the character of Mr. Douglas is.—I have been fpeaking of a future day : you are yet too young—I would not wish—at prefent, an alliance
of
V
2st	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
of any kind.’^—He pauSed. “ But come, let us go into the Iioufe.—I charge you remember what I have told ^ you, of guarding against; a few fashionable compliments.—Adr. Douglas will now be foon able to be our gueSt below stairs :—he is now pretty well.—-Remember my charge, Sophia.”
“ I am all obedience, Sir,” Said I, “ to your command. I will be particularly careful of my behaviour, I pro-miSe you.”
“ I know I can depend on my child,” faid this beSt of men.
“ Alas ! how deplorably weak,— how inconsistent is human nature !— and what is the refolution of a girl of sixteen years old! Certain it is, that my dear parent’s forewarning me, and prohibiting me from then entertaining any particular attachment to Mr. Douglas, did more in his favour, than even my owm heart was doing :—and as
certain
!a lesson for lovers.	25
certain it is, that the garden converSa-I tion had affected me beyond expref-rj Sion.
“ Could it be imagin’d pollible (but c Such is human nature) that in the even-0 ing of that day, my father being retir’d ’ to write his letter to the tutor at Ox-forcl, and I unfortunately left alone •. a few minutes with Mr. Douglas, who w^as that afternoon well enough to walk into the library, where Stood a fine harpSichord, on which he had been playing delightfully: could one imagine, ‘ I Say, that in one moment, I Should forget my promife as well as duty to the ' beSt of parents ? But fo it was.
“We were alone, as I have Said, ? for a few minutes. Mr. Douglas was playing bn the harpsichord, when on , his looking round and obferving my ; father had left us, he began singing i and accompanying himfelf in the most Tweet and plaintive Song I had ever heard. The words were Italian, but I B	knew
I
26	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
knew enough of that language to be : particularly .struck with the fubjest, ; which was a complaint of hopekfs love^ the object of it being,greatly fuperior to the enamour’d Sufferer.
“.This Song, tender, elegant, and pleasing in the utmost degree, Mr. Douglas performed in the highest Italian taste. It was even dangerous to hear. He Sung it as if it were the inmoft expref-fion of his Soul, and fixed his fine eyes on mine. I blufhed extremely;—as, in fact, he Seemed to be expressing his own Sentiments in what he was singing, and addressing them to me. Having finissied it, he aSked me how I liked the poetry of that fong.^
“ It is very tender,” replied I looking down.
“ Could you not pity, Madam, the unfortunate youth who should Suffer So Severely ?”
“ Perhaps I might—(I hesitated) if -—if he deferved it.”
“ That
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	27
“ That instant he Suddenly roSe, and throwing himSelf at my feet, exclaimed, “ My angel, I am that unhappy lover,—
I am that unfortunate wretch, doom’d for ever to defpair.” In short, he declared a most violent pafiion, which, he laid, from the first hour he Saw me, took its birth : that he wished to heaven he had died in his late illneSs, Sooner than be the prey which he now must be, to all the miferies—the torments of an hopeleSs love—“ for hopelefs., added he, it mitft be.—But fay—fay you do not hrtte me.” He took my hands and wetted theni with his tears. For my part, 1 thought he behaved like one distrac ted: he, indeed, Said he was So. Aster the most rapturous declaration, he be-- Seeched me only to declare I did not hate him.
“ Hateyo/^! Mr. Douglas,” I instant* ly exclaimed, “ no—-far from it.”
“ At that moment, we heard my father coming through the galleryhe luckily, however, did not obferve our B 2	confufion
y
28	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
confufion. I Say our, for it was mutual. Mr. Douglas had juft time to re-feat himfelf at the harpsichord, when my father entered the room.
“ That dear, and unfufpeBing parent, after fome general converfation, faid,
“ Mr. Douglas, I hope Soon you will be able to take an airing—we have delightful ndes in this neighbourliood,— and I shall shew you all that Devonshire affords.—It is now your long vacation at Oxford ;—your Summer re-cefs ; fo you can have no excufe for going there—I hope you will let us have your company long as you can.’’
' “ I Soon left the room, and retired, in imitation of fome of the heroines of ' romance I had read of, into the moft shady grove in the gardens ; where I fully ruminated on the heart-felt dif-courfe in the library. I need not add, it had made the deepest impreshon on my Soul imaginable.
'	“ But
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	1()
But my God! Said I, what have I done ? O my father, I have at once broken my Solemn wore! to you, in not only listening patiently to a declaration of the most violent passion, but I have even alSented to it—nay, have evidently pitied him who made it, and confejjcd I did So.—Ah, rash Sophia,
r	I
weak and imprudent!
“ Thus did I, for a fe w minutes, justly blame, as I deServed, my having Suffered a downright declaration of love, from a man who was almost a . stranger to me, and, by the SoftneSs of my behaviour, actually encouraged him.
“ But here let me draw a veil over my inexcuSable conduct. I ought here, indeed, to be ashamed to acknowledge, that, in the enSuing fortnight. Scarce a day passTed, but that Mr. Douglas, by billets,—by the moSt pashonate letters, which he contrived to ssip into my hand, and which I foolish girl received,
B 3	stilly
30	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
hill vehemently urged his love, and conjured me to give him Some kind of anSwer.
“ As I had, from my very cradle, been trained up in flncenty, and the moil rigid truth, I naturally abhorred every Species of deceit.—I was therefore determined to shew my fncerity at leaSi, and, imprudent as I was, to the highest degree, I wrote an anSwer to my very ardent lover, in which I a-voived my affection.—Alas ! I considered not, that Such a declaration would neceffarUy occasion innumerable difficulties and conSeq^uences not to be Surmounted !
' “ Mr. Douglas, after tlris my simple ponfeffion, appeared all rapture :—in short, we Soon began perfectly to understand each other, and were quite upon the footing of lovers.
“ You will pleafe Madam,” continued the amiable woman, “ to obferve, that this very critical period, was before the
anfwer
L
I	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	31
anSwer was received from the tutor at ^ Oxford, to whom my father had writ-I ten.—
1	‘‘ Sometimes (lost as I was in love)
theSe thoughts would occur :—Good God ! what am I doingWho knows, after all, what character this too amiable young man may bear i But thefe fru^ dent reflections Soon vanished : and I believe it is an undoubted fact, that the tyrant love, where he once takes poffeilion, is the most arbitrary of ail lawleSs t3T'ants whatever.
“ In a few days, one afternoon whilst we were fitting at tea, the post letters were brought.—My father, I Saw opened one impatiently, and appeared struck and thoughtful, while reading its contents.
“ Pray heaven, thought I, this be not' a letter of bad news from die tutor at Oxford!—I foon Sauntered into the garden, where my father, in Some little time after came to take his even-B 4	ing
a
5.1
32	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
ing walk. “ Sophia,” Said he, very gi'avely “ I have received a letter from the tutor of Mr. Douglas at Oxford ; _ -but I am equally SurpnSed, and indeed .grieved., to find his character not Such as I either wished or expected.”
“ Perhaps,” Said I extremely difcon-certed, “ the gentleman may be prejudiced against Mr. Douglas.”
“ Prejudiced!” Said my father,—“no, no, Mr. Goodwin is the most just of men :—I knew him formerly, and can rely on his word.”
“ I was struck with the utmost concern.
“ Here child,” continued he, “ you may read the letter.” Which he gave me with the most diffatisfied air imaginable :—adding, “ I never can have any good opinion of a man who has deceived me in the account of himSelf—I am obliged to Mr. Douglas, Sor pre- ^ , j Serving my life, but no other connec- !
V tion
! ' ■ A LESSON FOR LOVERS. .	33
don than common civility, will I ever have with him.”
“ TheSe words were a dagger to my heart : I thought I fhould have fainted.
I held out the letter with a trembling hand.
“ Nay,” Said my father, “ put it in your pocket, and give it me to-morrow. —-Read it at your leiSure. Oh! my dear child, how happy am I, in forewarning you to avoid all particularity ' for this young man !—what a happineSs that you have kept him at a referred
idifiance!”
“ Imagine Madam,” continued Mrs.-Hopkins, “ what I endured at this moment. My guilt, to the most in-1 dulgent parent that ever lived, now flushed at once to my view, in all its aggravating colours.—I ought—alas ! I know I ought, that instant, toshave flung ^ mySelf at the feet of this. unfuSpecting B '—this excellent father,, and confessed H my rash—my unpardonable conduct: B -	^5	but.
1
34	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
but ihame—^and probably my afiSectlon, for my too amiable lover restrained ; me.
“ I took a copy of Mr. Goodwin’s ■ letter, it is here in my pocket-book:
—I have,” Said Mrs. Hopkin’s Sighing ) bitterly, “ found it but too true an ^ account, faying which, fhe preSented me with a letter containing thefe words:
Worthy Sir,	Oxford—
I am Savoured with your’s ; but am Sorry I cannot give So pleasing an ac-count of my pupil Mr. Douglas as I could wish.—He is neither nephew, or heir to Sir Thomas Douglas ;—but, I believe, has Some Small connection with that gentleman.—The fortune of Mr. Douglas is very Small, and Some few fajhionahle levities he has indulged in,' have pretty much reduced his finances. —He was intended for the church, but | of late he Seems to have laid that Scheme entirely aside.—His understanding
L
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	35
ing is uncommonly good, So that I hope, in time., he will See his errors. His learning is very extenfive, and his wit and humour remarkable.—Upon the whole, I believe Mr. Douglas’s vices are more the vices of the age., than of the man. At preSent, he is thought-lefs and extravagant; and much addic< ted to pleafure.
I am. Sir, wdth all due refpect. Your most obedient Servant, Theophilus Goodwun.
This letter,”continued the amiable woman, “ on my retiring, and examining its contents, stung me almost into agonies. I was fully convinced my father would never give his conSent to my marriage with Mr. Douglas ; on the other hand, I had given him So much Encouragement, that though not absolutely engaged to him,Such were my high-stown, romantic notions of honour and gratitude, that 1 stiould have locked
on
1
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	?
on myfelf as highly blameable, to have retracted my esteem, or to have altered j my behaviour to my lover, merely be- ; cauSe his fortune /mail., or his character did not pleaSe an old peevisti fellow of a college, his tutor.-—Alas • Said I, what has fortune to do with Love P-—A cottage with Such a man as Douglas, would be a palace.—And after * all, 1 do not See that this letter contains So very—very dreadful a character as my poor father Seems to apprehend.
“ I past a miserable night; and on returning the original letter to my dear parent, “ Are you not amazed,” Said he, “ at the deceit of this young man, in palming himSelf on me for a nephew of Sir d'homas Douglas V
“ Perhaps,” anSweredl, “ you might mijiake him in that account,-—^Words, Sometimes, are,”—
“ Here my father interrupted me.
“ Mistake him ! no—no—^------1 am
not apt to be So much mistaken.”
“ I found
m
-T
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	57
si- I found what stuck most with this
i >	,
truly juji man, was this deception oI Mr. ^ Douglas:—for Such, I must here re-mark, was my father’s extreme np-, rightnefs and integrity of heart, that it was a rule with him in life, whoever had once impofed on him by a falfity, that perSon, he never more looked upon, with the leaft degree of favour, or for-givenefs.
“ From the time, therefore, of the ■ unfortunate arrival of this tutor’s letter, my father visibly, to my thinking at least, altered his behaviour to Mr. Doui. glas: he was civil, and behaved with, common good manners, but that was all, Nodonger didhe hang on his every word—no longer did he laugh incest-• fantly at his brilliant wit and stashes of humour. Whether my lover Saw this alteration, I know not:—but certain it is, he continually prelTed me most vehemently to give him every proof of : ’ my affedion,. consistent with virtue;-— h	That
^8	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
That he loved me, at this time, and ardently So, I have not the least Shadow
of a doubt.-----Alas! who knows not
the extreme rapidity of two young hearts, intoxicated with the delirmm of love ! In truth, we Seemed to exist but for each other.
“ The Summer vacation being now nearly expired, when it had been fixed i for his departure from the Abbey, Mr. Douglas appeared almost distracted :— he kneeled,—he wept,—he intreated I would at length give him my hand in *' private.
“ Your father,” exclaimed he, “ never—never, will give his confent I fear:—and I cannot live without my angelic Sophia.”
“ I fecretly, indeed, feared my father would never more desire his company at the Abbey : a thought which gave me the most poignant anguiSh.
“ Let us fly—^let us fly to Scotland,
Said my lover continually.------‘‘ But
ah,”
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	39^
' ah,” Said Mrs. Hopkins, at this part of her story, “ how fhall I be able now to proceed ?—wretch that I was to consent to a step So rash !—So mad!—To plead my youth, alas! is but a poor ^ excuSe :—no—Self-accufation shall attend my every Sentence.—I was unpardonable,—wholly inexcusable.—Do you not detest a wretch, madam (to me Said she weeping) who could deceive the tenderest, best of parents in So ca-' pital a manner ?—do you not abhor my conduct ?”
“ I befeech you, my dear Madam,” Said I interrupting, “ lay not the blame
So heavily on yourfelf.-----You was
wrong certainly, but there were many extenuations of your fault.—Your extreme youth,—your inexperience,— your having no mother to guide or direct,—your gratitude, which was So ' strongly excited for the preferver of your fathers life,—a first paffion in a young heart, tender and sincere ;~not
to
40	A LESSON FOR LOVERS'.
to mention, what indeed I think greatly in your favour, that your worthy parent had certainly by his partiality for Mr. Douglas, greatly forwarded your attachment for him ;—all thefe things considered, I must fay, (continued I) •there is much—much, to be siiid in your behalf.-—Pray proceed. I Sup^-pofe you both, fearleSs of confequences, stew on the wings of love to Scot-land.”
Alas !’^!—Said the amiable womaiT, “ too Surely I took that fatal step.-— One moon-light night, in an evil hour, I Set out with my fond Douglas, in a post-chaife and four, which waited in the park for this, mad Scheme ; and, notwithstanding the great distance, we arrived at Gretna-Green in lefs than six' days.—^This affair compleated, our next equally romantic step was to return to the Abbey, and throw ourfelves at the feet of my much injured parent.
=—T'his being our vain intention we accordingly
\
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	4I '
cordiiigly Set out from Scotland for ' Devonshire, I having Sufficient cash by ; me for that wife expedition.
“ Notwithstanding Some moments
iof pain for what my father would feel on the account of our flight, I SuppoSe I was, at this penod, the happiest of human beings. My Douglas was past ‘r fionately tender—tender to exceSs.—
^ In short, we were wholly given up to ; joy and love.—
r “ To love which knows no wish, Nor no ambition, but itfelfV
",	‘‘ In fine, we were now arrived near
the village in which stood my father's Seat, when a thought occurred to me, that we had better first stop at a most worthy clergyman’s (the rector of our parish) a very particular fnend and intimate of my father’s ; and v/ho alSo, with Jiis good wife, had been from may . cradle extremely kind to me.—Our chaiSe and four then was bid to stop
at
•/
42	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
at the houSe of Mr. Woodville, the worthy rector.
“ He, good man, who was fitting in his porch, enjoying his evening pipe, was astonished to See a carriage dnve up in Such haste to his filent manfion. He approached us, and I had began to alight.
“ Merciful Heaven 1” Said Mr. Woodville, “ is it you MiSs Sophia.?—
I beg your pardon, Madam—for I lup-poSe you are Mrs.—Mrs. Douglas by this time.”
“ I Said I, with an air of Satisfaction. Heavens! as if to fly from a tender father, into the arms of a man of w'hofe morals I had heard but an | indifferent account, was a matter of , pleafure !—Pray Sir, tell me,” fiiid I, i “ how does my father ?”	I
“ Well in health,” anfwered he, ] but”—he Stopped and fighed.	j
“ We now entered the parlour, ' where Mrs. Woodville was fitting.
She
I I	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	43
She received me with a look of concern and diSpleafure.—^She rung the bell for tea, and we fat down. The worthy woman, methought regarded me, however, with an eye of pity, in the midst of her astonifhment.
“ My dear child,” Said She, (for So Site always ufed to call me) “ you look fatigued.”
I “I am all impatience,” I cried, “ to i See my father,”
‘‘ Mr. Woodville shook his head.
“ I will not flatter you,”returned he, ‘‘ he is, indeed, extremely difpleaSed at your abrupt, unadviSed flight, and I fear,—greatly fear—he never will con-' Sent to See you.” O Heavens!” I cried, “ Mr. Douglas and I will kneel —will implore—will die at his feet.— Oh ! Sir! he muSt—he will forgive us.” Here my hushand, who posirefTed every power of rhetoric, in his un-bounded flow of the most perSuaSive language pleaded our cauSe; but in
vain..
/ \
44	A LHSSON FOR LOVERS.
vain. The good man only replied, it was out of his power to Serve us ; for that my father had vowed never more to See us, and that he had begged our names might be never mentioned to him.
“ I wept, and interceeded no more. H “ We remained that night at the I worthy Rector’s.—Mr. Douglas, in I the morning, again applied to our kind I host: to interceed for us.—We how- I ever thought itmoSt expedient to write I a letter exprestive of penitence, and aS- H Surances of future duty. This we did, n and on our knees, in *the preTence of -S Mr. Woodville, it was Sent, but re- ‘S turned unopened.	H
“ Come,” Said Mr. Woodville, wip- 1^ ing a tear from his benevolent eye, U ‘‘ I believe, young folks, you love each I other—and what is done is paSt reco- I very : I will go to the Abbey, and try || what can be farther pleaded in your ^ caufe.—Come Dolly,” Speaking to his |
wife, I
,s
I	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	45
wife, put on your hat, you shall go with me :—we will See what our joint endeavours can do.”
‘‘ How truly kind was this !
“To the Abbey they went on their kind errand ; whilffc we remained in a State of the most dreadful SuSpence : but it was Soon changed to terrible certainty; for on their return, Mr. Wood-ville Said, So Sar from hearing the least tittle in our favour, that my father had expreffed great anger to him and his f wife, for daring to interceed for a man, t who had, he Said, So Sar abuSed the f rights of even common hofpitality, as to baSely steal the daughter’s affections, w'hilSt her decePoed^ parent was hugging the fnake in his breast:—that my deceit —7ny perfidy and. ingratitude to a fond father, had now for ever obliterated all his tenderneSs : in short, that he renounced us both—that he would never give us a shilling—and that he utterly gave us up for ever,
“ I fainted
n
46	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
“ I fainted—and can only remember I found mySelf, on recovery, in the ^ arms of my fond huSband, who was 1 tenderly killing, and embracing me ;—' and affuising me, he would be father— hushanei—lover—every fnend in one.
“ Think not my fweet love,” Said - he, claSping me to his boSom, “ that the want of your fortune can be any diminution to my affcDion :—no, whether you brought the wealth of the Indies—or w^ere poor as beggary itSelf, whilSt I can call my Sophia by the name j of Douglas., it is to me a matter of no difference.”
“ In this manner did this then tern der hushand endeavour to comfort me, but I wept without ceasing,—as if I had even then a perception of my future mifery.
“ We then began to consider what step to take next.—We had only one guinea betwixt us. My aunt had left me a legacy of five hundred pounds,
which
I
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	47
I	.	^	^
which had been paid into the hands of my father’s lawyer. This was, undoubtedly, in my power then to receive :—and, indeed, all I had then to depend on. Whilst we were talking this matter over, Peter, my father’s old Servant, arrived at Mr. Woodville’s —I had a glimpSe of him, but he Seemed to fhun me.
“ Peter,” Said I, bursting into tears, will you not Speak to me V “ Ah, Madam, how could you”— he could fay no more.
“ He had brought, it Seems, a note from my father, of utter renunciation, if
I may So expreSs my Self.------This was
followed by Some other Servants bearing all my boxes, trunks and wearing apparel. On feeing thefe with the note arnve, a Sudden gleam of joy darted on my Soul, but it'was as c^uickly dissipated, as is the lightening’s staSh, on my tearing open the billet, and reading thefe dreadful words;
“ Mj
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
My child that rivas,
“ YOU have broke my heart-—yet I shall die with this my last wish, that you may never have caiiSe to repent of having bafely deceived your poor, fond fiither, who So tenderly doated on you from your earlieSt infancy, for the rash —the fatal Sake of throwing yourSelf into the arms of a worthlefs—an extravagant libertine.
“ Your Aunt’s legacy, as in equity bound, I shall fend you, this evening, by my lawyer :—from me., expect nothing,—I am as much afflicted at your deceit, as with any other part of your
shameful conduct.------1 desire to hear
no more from you; which is all, from
Your greatly injured, '	j
and abufed Parent.”
“I wonder |
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	49
“ I wonder Madam,” continued Mrs. Douglas, for I Shall call her no more Mrs. Hopkins ; “ how I out-lived this letter—cruel I cannot call it—for I de-Served it—and even more.—On reading it, I fell into strong hysterics, and remained very much disordered the next day.
“ The lawyer came, and paid the five hundred pounds in Bank-bills. A meSTage was Sent, at the Same time, to poor Mr. Woodville, desiring him not to harbour us any longer. I think I before mentioned, that my poor father was inflexible., whenever he found he had been treated with deceit. Many worthy families, in the neighbourhood, I understood, had interceededfor me, but in vain ; among whom was a Mrs. Summers, of whom I Shall have occasion to Speak in my story.—My father, how-evei% forbade her, on pain of his eternal difplcaSure, ever to mention my name more.
C	My
So	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
“ My God! Said I, what is to be done ?
“ Mr. W^oodville kindly advifed us to leave Devonshire.—“ Indeed,” continued he, “ I cannot, I grieve to Say, wish you to remain here longer, after what my kind patron has Said.”
“ We took this hint, and Soon determined to fet out for London;—that place of general rendezvous for the imprudent, the idle, and dishpated; as well as the buSy and industrious.
“ On the morning of our departure for the great metropolis, I felt an im-uSual Sadnefs at my heart.—Something feemed to whifper to my foul I was undone.—Mrs. Woodville preffed me to her maternal bofom: she even wept over me.
“ We may live, faid perhaps to meet j |j again.	* I
“ I got into the chaiSe with my belov- , cd hufband :—but in pashng by the avenue which led to the abbey, I Sighed—
I drop’d
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	51
I drop’d a tear, which Mr. Douglas tenderly kilTcd away.—We Set out, I fhould fay, with all my boxes and trunks, and our five hundred pounds, my portion. At London we arrived in Safety, after a three days journey.” Mrs. Douglas was just got to this period of her interesting story, when the declining fun, and my watch, warned me to defer any farther curiofity for the prefent, and wait till the next evening for the conclufion of her affecting tale,
“ I must now,” Said I, “ depart; but will remember to be with you again tomorrow, at five in the afternoon.— Adieu, dear Mrs. Douglas, then, for the prefent; remember you are Safely landed at London —I ffiall be ail impatience for the hour of hearing Jjow you went on tliere.”
She Sigh’d—and Shook her head.
‘ I will go,” Said she, with a Sweet languid Smile, “ to my Spinning wheel.” C 2	After
52	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	'
After a kind leave taken, I hastened home in a State of mind leSs tranquil than I had left it.
I was extremely punctual the day following in my visit to the cottage, and had previousiy Sent a provision of tea, desiring it might be prepared in the little bower.—In the bower, therefore, we drank our tea, the lovely twins playing round us.
Mrs. Douglas roSe every moment in not only my esteem, but my admiration: the elegance of her manner,— her fine understanding,—in short, a thouSand graces I obServed in her, which strongly attracted my attention.
Our repast being over,—“ Well,’’
Said I, “ pray continue your interesting history, and I beg you will continue to be very minuteV	I'
“ I would do every thing to oblige ^ you. Madam,”—she replied bowing.
. “At London we Safely arrived.— Where, at once, as if our finances were
to
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	53
to last for ever, my hustband took ex" treme handfome lodgings in Pall Mall.
I remonstrated, that a Sniall apartment would liiive been more Suited to our circumstances:—but this he would not hear of.
“ Hang care,” find he, “ let us enjoy the prefetit, and leave the future to take care of itfelf.—You know we are commanded to do So.”
“ ThoughtleSs man !” Said I.—He Smiled, and kissfed me.
“ The first two montlis were wholly' Spent in dissipation and the public amuSements. I had never before been in London,’ and my poor, imprudent huSband, was continually proposing our going to the play or the opera, he having an extravagant palsion for both amuSements.
“ 'Fhe hurry, the constant variety of Scenes, and the great bustle of the noiSy metropojis, did at first Somewhat divert my thoughts from regretting the of my excellent father’s affection; yet C 3	whenever
54	F LESSON FOR LOVERS,
whenever it did occur, I felt it very Severely:—though in truth, as I have Somewhere read, “to be beloved by the dear object we love, and to enjoy that love, is more than a balance for all the miferies and misfortunes of the world.—My Douglas was all to me,—
In poffelfing him my fate was, as I fool-iflily imagined, evenhappineSs unmixed.
My hufband w^as indeed tenderneSs it-Self:—poffestion had not Seemed to make the least abatement of his pastion.
“ In the Space of four months we had already Spent above an hundred pounds.
—-I was frighted at this:—but whoever knows London, and its expenfive | amuSements, will rather be Surprized tlie Sum was not larger.
“ For Heaven’s Sake, my dear Douglas,” Slid I, “ let us consider our lef-Sening, mouldering state of cash.—	|
What do you intend to do.^—Let us think how we are to live,—I shudder to think of this expensive town—Let us retire rather into Some remote county
in
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	5^
in the ftorth of England, and there take a litde cottage—no matter how mean.” “To this expostulation and advice, I was anSwered,—“ Sophia, you are a very pretty girl;—but indeed, child, a most miserable reaSoner in theSe cafes.” “ Blinded as my affection for my hulband made me, I could however See that he was dissipated, thoughtleSs, and unsettled to the last degree. Sometimes he talked of getting a genteel post, by means of a friend, in one of the public offices;—and at another of going on the stage.
“ I care not,” I ufed to fay, “ what your profeffion is, provided you are in Some honest way of getting a livelihood.”
“ Mr. Douglas poffeffed an infinity of mirth and humour, and whenever I gravely remonstrated on our declining finances, he would either laugh, or gaily repeat,
“ Since life is a Span;
“ Let’s ftrew the way over with flowers. *
“ He
t
56	A XESSON FOR LOVERS.
“ He came to me one day in violent hafte, faying, “ My angel,’' (by this appellation he frequently called me) “ do give me a bank bill of fifty pounds.—Here’s my dog of a taylor at Oxford has found me out, and the rogue wants his money.”
“ Well,” fiiid I, “ I am glad (giving liiin the note) we have the Sum.—Do you owe more, my dear, at Oxford.^”
“ Only,” returned he careleSsly, “a-bout two hundred pounds, and forty guineas I borrowed from my old tutor Codwin:” faying which he left the room humming an Italian air.
“ My God!” thought I, what will become of us.?”
“ I now began Soon to find myfelf in a condition (being fome months preg-^ nant) that would Soon be a confiderable encreafe to our expences : I therefore, more vehemently than ever, desired we might now epit our very handfome
lodging-5,'
%
A LESSON FOR .LOVERS.	57
lodgings, and retire to Some other better Suited to our circumstances.
“ This,at last, my poor carcleSs Douglas confented to :—and we took a Small unfurnished part of a houSe in a retired Street near CavendistiTquare.
“ Being determined to be as frugal in buying our furniture as possible, and having heartl of a large auDion, in the next street, with a variety of neceffary houshold goods to be diS’pofed of,' I mentioned it to my hufband, and he faid he would go there and purchafe fuch articles as v/ere proper.
“ Y/e had now no more caSh remaining than two hundred pounds ; one hundred of which, he took in his pocket for the above neceffary furniture, and immediately walked out for the auction. —But, good heavens! what was my vexation, when instead of ufeful articles of life I expected, Mr. Douglasshad fent home from the fale, a harpsichord, of . forty guineas price, with a pedal stop,
C 5	and
58	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
and about fix old pictures in gilded frames.
“ Are you absolutely mad, Mr. Douglas Said I, on his return.
“ My dear girl,” anSwered he, “ the pictures are of old Ptml Veronefe, and Claude Lorraine: never was Such a good bargain ! they are worth two hundred guineas, and I got them for ordj/ fxty.
—They are amazingly fine : a treafure for a lover as I am of virtu.—Never was Such a pennyworth—I have made a good morning’s work.—I Shall have them cleaned and brushed up, and then you will rejoice with me that I have had an opportunity of making So eafy a purchaSe.”
“ I stood aghast.
“ As to the harpfichord,” Said he, there is a richnefs in the tone, I could not refist—A peculiar Sweetnefs.—Indeed, that is as great a bargain as the pictures.”
All
1
LESSON' FOR LOVERS.	59
‘‘ All this, Mr. Douglas,’^ replied I, “ may be, but, you know, we really stand in need of xhc commownecejfaries of life.’^
Angry as I was, with my thoughtleSs I huSband, his joy appeared So extreme on his morning’s aequifition, that I half forgot my anger.
“ He fat down to; the haiq>fichord, and played a delightful concerto, that I lhould‘ hear its totie* When over, he clafped me to his bofom, and thus was my anger, for tliat time, away..
“ Our really neceffary furniture being then foon after procured, reduced our fmall stock of cafli to fifty pounds only.—^I began tO' be exceflively un~ eafy; but, alas ! what were thefe un-eafineffes to the dreadful, heartTelt affliction I experienced when one day, as I was fitting in^ a melancholy mood alone, I happened to take up a newspaper, and read, the following para-graph! •
On
I
1
A LESSON	FOR LOVERS.	j
“ On Sunday died, after a lingering ! “ lllneSs, which he Sustained with chnS- \
•	i
“ tian	fortitude, Robert Morley,	ESq.	J
“ of West Abbey, in Devonshire: a ' “ gentleman So univerfally beloved, that “ his death is lamented by all who had “ the	happinefs of	his acquaintance.’’	'
“ O my father!—my dearest father!”
I exclaimed—and violently shneking—* fiiinted away.
‘‘ My hushand found me in that condition, and, indeed. Strove all he could by every argument, to Soothe and comfort me:—but I refufed all comfort,— violently crying out, “ It is I—it is I have killed my poor parent! Oh wretch that I am!—it is 1 v/ho brought him with Sorrow to the grave.”—And, indeed, Said Mrs. Douglas, bursting into tears, there was every reafon to Sup-	j
poSe my conduct had been the caufe of | • the fatal lingering illnefs, as mentioned, as he had ever been remarkably healthy for his years.—Yes—yes —it was my
mad—	I
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	61
mad-—iny shameful folly, that destroyed that best of men !—and, ahs ! I Soon —Soon found his prophetic words too fully verified.
For Several weeks I continued in a most miserable state :—and to add to . my Sorrows, we were now perpetually befet with duns, for debts my hulband had either contracted in Oxford, or London, before I knew him.—Our last fifty pounds was now gone, and I liad been obliged to pay off Some of thoSe debts with felling my watch Set with diamonds, which had been my mother^’s.
“ I should have before-faid, that when my ever-lamented father Sent me my wearing apparel, my jewels and all my little trinkets of value, were Sent me at the Same time.
“ Before I had parted with the above watch, I had Sold a pair of fine diamond earings, and we were now living on the Sale of my BruffelSs laced lappets.
“ Mr.
62	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
“ Mr. Douglas talked of many wild ] fchemes of getting into Some way of J living:—but they ended in nothing.	|
“ One day he began tranflatingfortlie	t
booksellers, by which he certainly might	t
have got Some profit, but Such waS' his I remiSTnefs—his careleSs neglect—and	[
entire dissipation, that he could get little enployment of that kind.—And now to complete my Sorrows, if not already done, methought, I perceived a kind of referve^ or rather coolneSs, in the behaviour of my hufband, which shocked my foul.—d attributed it however, to the dreadful state of our circumstances, which I imagined had Soured his temper r.
I was however grieved beyond expreS- . stonr—His anSwers were often pettish, as on my alking a question he would Say,.
How should you, a 'woman, know any	,
thing of this matter ?” with many other peevish retorts of the like kind.
“ I do not here mean, that my huf-band treated me with unkindiicts in
any	^
A LESSOJ? FOR LOVERS.	63
any effential matter.—attributed the change I mention merely to the Situation, of our unfortunate affairs,—or, perhaps, to that too common indifference which generally takes place after a twelve-montPs marriage.
“ He frequently now staid out till midnight, without astigning any apparent cauSe for it. One time in particular, he returned in high Spirits.—I was Sitting up for him, reading, by a Small glimmering fire.—He gave me a kiSs, and flung twenty guineas into my lap.
“ There Sophia,” Said he, have I not been lucky P”
“ Lucky, my Henry!” returned I, much amazed, “ how did you get them ?”
“ ASk no question,” Said, he, ‘‘ and be fatisfied with my good fortune.” Another night he produced ten gui-^ - iOieas, and fo on; but he ever evaded my question how he came by the money. I was a good deal alarmed, fearing he
was
64	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
was become that deSpicable character a gamester.
“ I now ill one month more expected to become a mother, when one afternoon, as I was fitting alone, ruminating on my diStrest Situation, I received a post letter from the Mrs. Summers I before mentioned in Devonshire.
i
—I had corresponded with her often Since I came to London, but from that kind of falfe pride or shame, which all feel who have brought down ruin on ^ themfclves, as I had done, I never men- ; tioned in my letters our Iotv circumstances.—I had often, and indeed truly Said, that Mr. Douglas behaved with much affection.	;
‘‘ Mrs. Summers,, whom I most sincerely loved, and whom I would have been glad to oblige in any instance, she having been extremely kind, though ' unfuccefsful in her interceshdns for me to my juStly offended father, now wrote to acquaint me, that her darling daiigh-
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	65
ter, and only child, was coming to London to have her jewels new Set, to have an Italian , singing master, for I Some little time. She having a remarkable fine voice; and, in Short, for a jaunt of pleaSure; and that, as we had been old School fellows. She siiould be particularly happy if I would permit her Lucy to be a few weeks with me.
“ I was rejoiced at this. Lucy Summers, was my dearest, and most intimate friend ; we were just of the fame age, had been infeparable intimates at the boarding School, where I left her, and where She had remained till after my foolish elopement.
“ Mrs. Summers politely in her letter begged I would inform her if Lucy's coming would be any way inconvenient ; adding, she had no acquaintance in London but myfclf, and could not choofe her daughter to be in a lodging-houSe alone. .
‘‘I should
I
66	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	*
“ r should here fay, she did not know I was So near my delivery.
“ I communicated this letter to my , hushand, who by all means Said, he de-fired the young lady might come to us.
“ It will make no difference, Said I, in our table:—Lucy Summers is not accustomed to elegance ; and I am convinced her good mother will amply make up to us any little expence we may be at on her account.
“ I wrote as kind an invitation as I could, and in leSs than ten days Mifs : Summers arrived..—^Her mother could not accompany her on account of a gouty complaint to which she was Subject.
“ My friend, whom I had not Seen, as I Said before, fince I left the School, j was much grown. She was a tall, fine ^ girl, always rather of the large size:— handSome, but not delicate, having Something in her air and manner that bordered on the mafculine :—however,
she
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	SJ
she was at this time a fine full-formed girl: barely eighteen, perfectly good natured, much addicted to romping, carelefs, and free.
* “ I received my old companion with an unfeigned joy, and for an hour I perfectly forgot all my griefs. We laughed and talked over a number of stories and Scrapes at School, which we had been engaged in, with great pleasure, and my Douglas joined in our mirth :■—in short, he Spent a very a-greeable evening, and did not retire to bed till a late hour:—^my hushand, who certainly was the most agreeable companion in the world for a Social hour, was in high Spirits. We were no Sooner entered our apartment than he began laughing.
My Sophia, what a great bouncing, mstSculine girl, this friend of yours isi N mere Devonshire hoyden !—What indelicacy!—not the least degree of foftneSs, or feminine beauty about her!
With
68	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
With the fiiside and air of a downright trooper, she has the face of a country itiilkmaid! Her voice (for she had Sung a Song after Supper) is the mere Squall, and Scream of a common ballad finger.
My life for it, if she fliould be taught j by all the Italian fingers in London, they never can give her tajie :•—she is devoid of Sentiment.-—The girl has good eyes,—but her immenfe perfon, and her very robust appearance, render her a perfect antidote.—How old is she V “ About eighteeen, replied!, but, for Heaven’s fake, my dear Harry, pray be civil to her:—you know I have - great obligations to her worthy mother. m —You shall not, Said I laughing, abuSe my Lucy thus :—flic is a good natured girl, and deServes better treatment.”
“ Good natured she may be, he re_ plied, but it is astonifiiing to me, that you, who are So remarkably delicate yourfeif, fiiould be So attached to Such a	in petticoats. Never was there
-	I
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	69
So strong a contrast as there is betvveen you too.—But, what am I to fqttire this great girl about to the play, and the opera—She never was in London, I think you Said, before :—I Shall have a fine time of it, if I am to be h.QV chapron to public places ;—but, as your friend, I certainly will shew her every civility
in my power.-----How long will she
ftay?”
“ Till after my recovery from my approaching confinement, undoubtedly, returned I. Do, dear Harry, be civil to her, I befeech you.’'
“ I will—I will—Said he—but she is a perfect tramontane.”
“ A week pasted on very agreeably on all Sides.—I was glad of Mifs Summers’s company, as I thought a third perfon prevented my hushand frorfi brooding over the diSagreeable circumstance of our low finances.—As he often produced five or ten guineas out of his pocket, I was convinced the
gaming-
yO	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
gaming-tables were his refource; a thought which gave me the most poignant anguish.
“ My young friend, who had never I Seen Garrick, at length, attended by I Mr. Douglas, went to Drury Lane thea- I tre to the tragedy of Lear. As my H condition made me think it not So pru- ' dent for me to venture into public, I stayed at home, and to my great Surprise, they did not return till near twelve o’clock.
“ Lucy, Said I, obServing her hair Somewhat dishevelled,—why your cap is half off.”
“ That wretch your hushand, replied she laughing, has quite demolished my i dreSs.—^Never was Such a romp.”
A romp !—-Said I,—I thought I had been acquainted with all hie vivacities, but I never knew he was a romp before.”
“ The following day, this romping continued:—indeed I laughed heartily to fee them.	{
‘‘ Lucy, ’
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	71
“ Lucy, Said I, you have quite the Spirit of an abSolute rioter:—lihall have all my china, tables and chairs broke : —do, good folks, take care, you do not hurt each other.’^
“ A fqueamifJj wife, would perhaps Sometimes have been rather diSpleaSed at the liberties which this Species of a-muSement, called rompmg^ necefTarily occafions. Lucy’s cap was flung on the ground, whilst fhe was flapping Douglas with her flipper, which he had tom from her foot.—I fay fome wives, would have frowned at this, but I was unfuf, ^ pedting^ and always adopted that ebu-plet of the poet,
“ O free for ever be his eye,
Whofe heart to me is trueF
“ At length the dreadful hour arrived " of my being Seized with the pangs of child-birth. Dreadful I repeat—for I fuppofe no woman ever Suffered more.
I laid a whole week in agonies, and was attended by two Surgeons : at last
I was,
1
72	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
I was, however, delivered of twins—> theSe dear babes now with me.
“ The extreme weakneSs I was now in, rendered it necefSary I should be kept as c^uiet as pofiible.—MiSs Summers Sometimes would look in upon me ; but I constantly begged she would not confine herSelf in my apartment: beSides, I was too ill to talk.—My hushand, to my astonifliment, did not shew thatjcy, on the birth of the children, as is uSual, with most father’s, at their first becoming So.
“ Sophia,” Said, he one day, “ I should be more with you, but you ; know one cannot leave our guest quite alone.”
“ drue, Said I, I hope you tjy to amuSe her.^”	’	*
“ I might, indeed, have heard they were amufed:, as even when I-was at the worst, I could hear the harpsichord going,and at other times, violent fits of laughter, rompings. Sec,
‘‘ I !
!
I
A LESSON FOR LOVERS. ’ 7J
“ I began now to be able to Sit up in my bed, though extremely weak.— My hufband and MiSs Summers had that afternoon drank tea in the room.
Harry, Said I to my huSband, I Shall be quite angry if you do not look at your little girls.”
“ Aye, girls., Said he, I wiSh they had been hoys. What are we to do with /wo girls <?”
Nay, Said I, it pleaSed Heaven to fend girls, and we ought not to repine at that.
“ Heaven! exclaimed he, laughing, what hzd Heaven to do with it ^—Upon my word, Sophy, you grow So Solemn —So prudish”—
Do I ? Said I faintly. There was Something in his manner So inexpreSli-bly cold—So. indifferent, that, joined with the very weak State I was in, I could not help Shedding a few Silent tears, which were unperceived.
VOL, ir.	D	“ That
N.
74	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
That evening my hufband attended MiSs Summers to a new opera.
“ As he now could not So often fre quent thoSe gaming houSes, where I was convinced he had got his late resources of cash, I was obliged to Supply him, for his preSent occafions, with a Sum which aroSe from the fale of two very handSome Suits of cloaths, I had before my marisiage. In short, I al-moSi; stript my Self, and had nothing now of real value remaining, but a very beautiful diamond fiecklace, which I much esteemed, and which I was determined nothing but the last neceshty should make me part with.
“ I had now lain in Several weeks, but still remained extremely weak, low, and languid ;—obliged stequently to ' lay on the bed for Several hours in the day.
“ One afternoon, when I was just laid down, my hushand came into the room,
and
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	75
android me he was excestively preffed, for a Small Sum.
“ I Shall go out to morrow morning, Said he, to meet a gentleman, who, I have the pleaSure of informing you, will effectually Serve me, with Lord ! S—, in a genteel poSt:—but there are j fees — fees — on theSe occasions to I	clerks, Sec, and where to raiSe a Sum
i	neceffary for the occasion, I know not.
1	••—Is there any thing left Sophia ?’'
j	“ Nothing,Said i sighing, but our very
Iasi: reSource—the diamond necklace— and if you are So preffed,—why, you muSt have it,-—But do, my dear, manage it frugally.—We have -nothing now remaining.—My rings are, nay even my common wearing apparel is gone
—all gone !------Here, take my keys,
and you will find the necklace—it is in hiy bureau.”
“ My huSband accordingly put the Qccklace in his pocket, and epming to ^	D e	tite
76	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
the bed-side, he gave me a flight kiSs, and left the room.
“ I dropped afterwards into a fliort ' Slumber, which was interrupted by MiSs ! Summers. She Sat down in a chair, by the bed-side, and began chatting in her volatile way—it was now about eight in the evenino;.
O	•
. “ Lucy, Said I, lend me your Salts, | my poor head akes I’adly.”
“ She took out her pocket handkerchief with her Salts :—that inStant our maid came to desire she would come down to a milliner who had brought her bill.—Mils Summers then haftily ^ left the room ; and I putting my hand on the table, which flood clofe to the hed-side, to take up the Salts, obServed, with the pocket handkerchief, a letter | much rumpled ; taken out, I SnppoSe, j by mistake, wsith the other things.
“ I was however exceflively SurpriSed, as by the light of the candle, I Saw it
was
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	77
was written in my hufband’s hand-writing. I took it up, as may be naturally imagined, and there being no one pre-Sent but my two Sweet babes aSleep by my Side, I read it. But, good Heavens ! I was almost Struck dead—pe-i tnfied wkh astonifhment, and horror,
• when I found it was the mostpalsionate love-letter that imagination can form, from the most ungrateful of all men, iny hufband, to Mils Summers.—By the date, I Saw it had been written four days before.—It gave me clearly to understand, that She had fully granted him the entire postcflion of her perSon; and in his rapturous manner of cxprefiion, he moSt ardently deSired her to grant / him a repetition of his former happi-neSs that night;—that he Should give the uSual signal at her chamber-door; that Jhe alone was the -wife of his Soul;
—that he now knew what it was to love;—and that he was hen, and only hers, for ever.
D 3	“ It
78	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
“ It is amazing to me that, on reach ing this moSt dreadful letter, I preServ-edmyienSes:—and what is Still as woi> dcrSul, that I did not faint.—On the contrary, heaven, that instant, Seemed to inipire me with that just reSentment, j v/hich Such cruel, baSe, and unmerited j tiSage deferved.—I felt my Spint rouS- ' cd:—and at that moment my foul Spurned the leaSt idea of having any future connection with Such villany. ;
Abandoned man ! Said I, at the •very period that thy poor, deceived ■wife, who had Sacrificed her father, for^ tune, fame, and every worldly conSi-deration for thy fake; who was even , on the brink of the grave, and that occasioned by the dreadSul perils of | child birth on thy account:—then-then to Seduce—to betray my friend ! entrusted to our hoSpitable care !—-fe-ducc did I fay ?—Ah, vile girl —^deceitful—cruel'—bafe—ungrateful creature ;	,	•
“ My
I	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	7Q
‘‘ My heart Seemed, at this moment, almost bursting with rag'e and reSent-ment;—when, looking round, I fpyed my children.—SoftneSs now took poS-Session of my foul,-and a stood of tears j	came to my relief. I wept till I could
j	weep no more,—and again Seemed to
j be re-animated with Some little degree of Spirit.—T'lie strmnefs that ever attends absolute deSpair, now Seemed to calm my gnef;—and a thought instantly occurred which, with Surprizing resolution, I put into practice.—I rang the bell for my maid.
“ Nanny, Said I, give me pen, ink, and paper, I want to write a billet.
“ I instantly took my huSband’s horrid letter, and folding it up, put it in a cover, in which I wrote the few following words.
Mr. Douglas,
For the future, caution the next young woman you feduce, to be more careful of your letters ; lest, as in the D 4	preSent
8o	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
preSent cafe, they should fall by accident into the hands of an injured wife, who has Sacnficed her n// for your happi-neSs.	^
I
Sophia.	}
“ This letter I carefully Sealed with his enclofed; and ringing my bell, afked the maid if her master was in the par-	*
lour. She Said yes, and that he had just	j
lent out for a cold chicken and lobsters, for himfelf and Mifs Summers.—
Well, laid I carelefsly, give him this letter.-^I am now going to rest, and do not	come	in again	to	disturb me;	'
—I want	nothing—^nothing	for shpper,	i
this night.
I felt mySelf raifed.—No, Said I (the maid being gone) I will not meanly yield to this vile wrong ;—my just indignation will fushciently Support my Spirits.
“ The clock now struck eleven.—
What I felt, at this dreadful period, I cannot dtfenbe. it can be imagined only;
—A fort
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	8t
—A fort of gloomy Satisfaction arofe in my Soul, however, that I had informed the molt deceitful of men, and his equally guilty paramour, that I was fully acquainted with their perfidy.
“ It is needleSs to Say what night I paffed.—My huSband had not, it may be imagined. Slept in my apartment, on account of my iilneSs for Several, weeks: I was therefore alone. Save the com> pany of my two ' Sweet babes.—One hour I wept over them,, the next, almost frantic, I execrated the vile Douglas, and his lewd affociate :—at length, just at day-break, I dropped into a gentle dofe.—Some little noiSe Iiaving waked me, again all my miSeisics returned.—My maid coming in„ I enquired, I know not why,, if it was a fine morning.—Yes madam. Said she, iris a lovely one. They have charnir ing weather.’^
“ They ! returned I, who
MiSs, Summers, and my maSBer, D 5	madam
^2	A LESSON FOR LOVER5,
madam, they Set out this morning in a
post chaife and four, and are gone Some
journey,—to Dover, I think.—I heard
them both Say, last night, they hoped
to be in France in a few days.”
“ What more the girl Said I know I
not;—for now my late philoSophy for-
fook me,—a. Sudden pang Seized my
heart,—I shrieked,—and Sell into strong
hvstencs. A violent fever Succeeded A
this agony, in which, I was afterwards informed, I lay three weeks, perfectly delirious :•—Sometimes raving on the name of Douglas ;—and at other, calling out for fhife Lucy Summers.— know nothing of what past at this dreadful period, but what I have Since been told only remember, when I recovered the life of my reaSon, my weak-nefs was So extreme, that my voice could with difficulty be heard.—I Seemed, at that moment, to have but an imperfect view of my miSeries.—I looked round my bed.—“ Had I not, Said I in
a faint
A LESSOJt FOR LOVERS.	§3
a faint accent, had I not once two dear little babes—Had I not once an huS^ band —Had I not, too, a friend “ O madam,” interrupted I, the amiable woman at this affecting part of her history burSting into tears ;—“ I cannot bear this—but yet—go on.”
“ I looked round,” continued fhe ; “ and Saw three people kneeling round my bed.—One was my maid, the other a nurSe, and the third a gentlewoman, by her appearance, with a cordial in her hand, of which fhe perSuaded me to take a little. This humane perSon, I afterwards learnt, was the widow of a clergyman, who lodged directly opposite the houfe I lived in, and though an entire Stranger to me, yet, from the apothecary who attended me, had heard So very melancholy an account of my cafe and, situation, in being abandoned by my huSband, that, from motives of mere humanity only, it - ^	Seems
ss4	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
Seems, She had often visited me, though, alas, I knew it not I To this worthy woman, who was herfelf but in very moderate circumstances, I may Say, under heaven, I owe my recovery.—She now constantly Saw me every day ;— she brought me the most nounshing food, and would lay my languid head on her kind maternal boSom.
“ You are very—very good madam,
Slid I, indeed I want your aid.”	|
“ A fortnight had now past, when I ^ was juft able to sit up a few hours every day.—My poor babes uSed to be brought to me, and I wetted them with my tears.
—Mrs. Harris, the name of my kind fnend, did not on theSe occasions, like most impertinent confolers.^ blame my griefs, but tenderly Soothed, and mixed her tears with mine.
“ I was now able to tell her my Sad history—(little as my difobedience to the best of parents could recommend me
to
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	8^
to the efteem of any one)—and I alfo informed her of my wretched state of poverty.—^Indeed, at this time, I had not a guinea in the world.—Mrs. Hands looked on me with the most tender compassion.
“ I grieve, Said she, my dear, that I, from a very contracted income, have it not in my power to be of ejjhitial fervice to one I So sincerely commife-rate.—I will, however, difcharge for you this expensive nurfe of yours, and likewiSe your apothecary’s bill.”
“ How truly kind was this !
“ This angelic woman, for So I must call her, talked to me So Seiiftbly, So properly, and with So much Christian piety, that though she could not cure, she, at least hujhed my griefs, and'enabled me to bear them with Some Small degree of calmneSs, and resignation.
“ But I now was to experience another misfortune in the loSs of this dear friendf-^She was one morning found
dead
/
86	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
dead in her bed, having been Seized with an apoplectic fit.—-Thus was I deprived of my last and only remaining Source of aid and comfort!—But GodL 'luill be done,, I humbly Said.
“ When I was able to think on niy forlorn situation, and in Some meaSuie relieved from the violence of this last astliction, I at once determined to quit my lodgings, and to remove with my' poor babes, whoSe Smiles were now my only comfort, into Some retired corner of the town, where I would take by the week an obScure garret.
“ I talked with the landlord of the houSe where I then was, who conSented to take the furniture I had, which was all good, at an appraiSement of about thirty pounds, which was the Sum I owed him -for rent.—At this Sad period, to raiSe Sufficient cash for my removal, I was likewise obliged to diSpoSe of almost the few remaining neceffaries of common apparel I had.—I have before Said
I had
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	87
I had long fince difpofed of every thing cojlly.—1 was now reduced to one gown only, and for linen I was equally necessitous.
“ And here a new affliction tried md —which was, being obliged from poverty alone, to part with the faithful good girl, my Servant.
“ Nanny,” Said I weeping, “ we muff part—^I am now poor myfelf,—and am now going to retire to Some garret best Suited to my very low sttuation.— I cannot Support you, my good girl it would be even an injury to your future welfare.”
“ My dearest Madam,” Said this faithful creature, bursting into tears, “ let me—let me still attend you :—I will work for you, indeed, without reward: I afk none but being with you, and th? dear little missfes.—Pray let me go with you.”
“ Will you quite break my heart ?” returned I, fobbing:—“ np—no, it cannot
1
8S	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
not be.—Think, my dear girl of your own Interest, and forget your poor mist trefs.’^
“ She still vehemently begged I would permit her attendance even^mz^/V, which I,however, from motives of generosity, could not permit, and for a whole day we remained in this most trying emu flict.—^To me it was truly So, as the faithful creature alternately was weepr ing over the poor children and myfelf-“ Ah!” Said Mrs. Douglas, bitterly sighing at this affecting penod of her history,—“ little do the nch, the great, the disiipated, know the thoufand— thoulknd heart-felt pangs, that the breast of fetiftbility feels, when plunged in poverty and distrefs like mine!—In. the prefent cafe, I however (grievous as our parting was) at length got the befe^ ter of this too affecting contest.
The faithful girl having Said She would remain no longer in London, as Ihe could not live with me, She fixed
on
I
I
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	89
on Setting out, the following day (when I too was to depart for my garret) to return to her friends in the north of England.—Our parting, when the time came, indeed was more than I could bear.—She kiffed my children repeatedly by turns—She hung on my neck in a passion of grief—and at length I was forced to tear my Self from her, and get into a hackney coach to avoSd' her tenderneffes. This I did with my two poor babes, and a Small bundle of linen—all my stock! When I parted from this most worthy girl, my very heart Seemed to die within me:—indeed, perhaps, at that moment, there was not a more forlorn, a more destitute being among the daughters of afstic-tion in the whole world than myfelf.
“ I stopp'd at a Small strop, which had ah upper chamber to let in a very ob-fcure street, and Soon agreed to take it by the week.—My poor babes were then both in a Sweet steep.—When the
woman
90	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
woman of the honSe was departed,!Sat down on an old worm-eaten chair, and wept for a length of time without inter-miflion.
“ In a few days I began to enquire for a little needle-work, and with much dishciilty got Some, that the woman , of ^
the houSe procured me--------but, alas!
could make but little with - it! Such is the dreadful State of a reduced gentler woman ! I, who had ever been uSed to cafe, constantly waited on, and accuS-tomed to good living; had now no Servant to attend me, and the little moiv fel I took to Support life, w^as obliged to be prepared by my own hands—So that what with the constant attending two . Such helpleSs children as mine, So young as they then were, must occasion—I had, alas, not a single hour, indeed moment, to employ at my needle (my only Support) but when they were both * asieep, which was Seldom the cafe. My situation w’as, therefore, distrefsful to
the
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	91
the last degree. To add to that distreSs, my health gradually declined, and I had not a friend on earth to whom I could apply for relief under theSe accumulated evils. The worthy Mr. and Mrs. Woodville had been long since gone to Lifbon, to a Son who was there Settled; the distant relation, who now was in poffeSrion of that large fortune and hoS-pitable mansion which my own wretched folly had deprived me of, was a fordid old limnourist, and to whom I could not have a thought of making known I	my distresses.—There is a dignity often
in poverty (if I may So expreSs myfelf) which will even Support the unfortu-, nate, though almost famiShing from day to day. Sooner than alk relief of an haughty Superior.—Whether this Sen-, timent ariSes from pride,, or from for-t f itude, I will not pretend to determine.
“ Mrs. Summers, that worthy fnend[, to whom I could even with propriety have applied, had not the late dreadful
incident
'
92	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
incident happened, was now the very Irift perSon to wliom my bleeding heart could fly for relief. Heavens! could the 'Wife of the vile feducer of li^ii only child,—though that child guilty as himfclf, and the companion of his wicked flight,—tear her wounded foul with a repetition of the Sorrows they had both occasioned —But, however, though I knew it not at the time, I might have Spared niyfeif any reflections of that kind, as that dear and valuable woman w^as then ho more :—her wretched daughter's conduct having, it Seems, by Some accident,reached her. —She, who was the mosi: tender of mothers, unable to bear fo Severe a stroke, funk under it, and lived only one w^eek after the fatal tidings.—But to return to my miserable Self.
“Poor and pitiful was my condition: for six weeks I Subsisted only on a little weak tea, and bread; for my dear children was all my anxiety.—For
them
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	93
them I procured milk, and fed them continually.—My lovely babes (Said I, claSping them to my fond bofom, whilst they now began to laugh and crow in-ceffantly) had we now the diamond necklace to find us bread, the produce" of which thy wretched parent is at this time wantonly Spending on his wicked paramour, it would be well.
“ I could now get no needle-work— and in Short the last diStreSs Seemed to stare me in the face-—I v/ould^ gf^idly have undertaken a Service in any reputable family, but my children rendered every thought of that kind abfolutely f impracticable.
“ Whilst I was one'evening more than commonly affected with my wretched situation, and having not at that time two siiillings left In. the world, after having difeharged my weekly lodgings, 1 happened, merely by accident to unpin a little bit of inuSlin, which though I had often Seen in my Small bundle of
linen,
1 ^
94	^ LESSON FOR LOVERS.
linen, I had never before regarded. I now, however, opened it, when to my no Small SurpriSe, I found carefully, wrapt up in paper, two guineas.—1 was astonished.
“ Heaven! Said I, this is thy appointment!” I fell on my knees, and audibly gave thanks for So Seafonable a relief—but my amazement was, how this mighty Sum to me (a starving wretch) came there.—At length, I concluded my poor faithful Servant had taken tliis method of giving to my wants, what she knew I would not have received from her hands.—I wept, and Said to mjSelf, I now remember her Saying at parting, “ Pray madam, take care of the little red bundle.” In short, I was convinced it was poor Nanny's bounty. —How precious in the fight of him who alone knows the heart, must be So pure an .offering of gratitude and affection !—almost, her little alL^
“ I began
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	95
“ I began the next day, when the first flights of my Surprife were over, to be rather Scrupulous in breaking this inestimable treafure :—I ought, Said I, not to uSe it.—Perhaps, after all, it might be put up in Some mistake.— No—-no—-I will not touch it :•—I will restore it to her, when opportunity permits—-in the mean time providence Will provide for us, I doubt not.
“ Alas! how piercing are the cries of hungry children ! and what is the resolution of a poor, almost famifhed being, to the above ideal determina-\ tion !—At that moment, I heard my poor b'abes crying for bread; whilst my I own tongue was parched to my mouth with thirfS.----------
' “ My Scruples, for in justice I really j could have none, now forSook me: I immediately changed one ,oS the guineas, and with a Small part of it, procured Some strengthening food.
“ A thought
a
9si	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
“ A thought one morning struck , me; to go at once into Some little village, in a county distant from London, where, in a cottage of twenty shillings a year, I might, in a much cheaper manner than in that expensive city, provide bread for my poor little ones and Self.
“ I packed up accorclingly my Small treaSure, and with my two babes Set out, resigning mySeIf to the will of heaven, on my journey. Having luckily heard of a returned post-chaife, and other cheap modes of travelling, I got nt last to a Small town, on the borders of Sustex.—There, I remained in the houSe of a poor widow, Sor above three years. My condition, however, was iniSerably indigent, though I just made shift to Support my children and my Self with bread, and the cheapest diet I could procure.—My needle was my only refource:—but the constant head-
achs
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	97
achs I laboured under, occafioned by the shocks of grief I had Sustained, rendered me incapable of fine needleworks.—I had before attempted to ‘ teach a little School, but met with no encouragement. I had one comfort, how-ever, in the midst of my poverty, that I I Saw my dear little girls in perfect ,	health:—and in truth, if the partiality
of a fond mother did not deceive me,
I all I wished them at their tender age to be.
'	“ My health not permitting me to
j. get my living by my needle Solely, I pro-} . cured a Spinning wheel, to which I applied mySelf with Such ashduity, that I I Soon became mistrefs of that branch of r , industry ; and I had Soon after an opportunity of gaining this little habita-. tion upon easier terms than living In a town; the brother of the woman where I lived, faying, he had a little cottage (meaning this) which he would gladly permit any perSon to live in, free of VOL. II.	E	rent,
9§	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
rent, who would take care of his garden. As I am particularly fond of the country, and as I Should have no rent to pay, I eagerly embraced this ]^'o-poSal, and the next day moved my children and my Spinning wheel. See,—to this little peaceful abode ; the distance from the town being only a few miles. —Here I have remained above half a year. The Sweet air of the place agrees with us ; and by the help of what vegetables my little garden produces, and what milk and bread 1 can get, I make Shift to fupport life with humble resignation to the great Author of my being.—My faithleSs hushand, and my falSe friend, his vile affociate, I have never heard the least tidings of, neither do I now ever expect, or desire it.
“ And now,*Madam,” Said this lovely woman, “ have I at length brought my little history to a conclusion.—To you,” fhe was pleaSed to Say, “ it can be of no uSe as a 'warning; but to the
giddy
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	99
giddy—inconSiderate part of my fex, it might poffibly convey Some instruction.—Thus, Madam, was I undone, by uniting myfelf to that worst of all detestable characters, a man of pleafure —a libertine—which character, in whatever light it may be looked on by the*^ gay and fashionable part of the world, in reality comprehends every thing that is baSe, vile, and contemptible.’^
Here the amiable Mrs. Douglas ceaSed Speaking. Your own feeling heart, my dear friend, will Suggest to you what mine felt at her affecting tale.
■—Her artlefs, and unadorned manner of relating her distreffes, was peculiarly pleasing, and drew from me a Sympathy I never before experienced.
After every affurance of friendship, to asiist and provide for her and the little ones (concerning which I have a Scheme in my head). I finished my very agreeable visit.—It is no'w'high time, likewise, to finish this large pacquet, E 2	which
.
lOO	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
which I have luckily’’ an opportunity of
Sending by Lady S-----, who will be
in Ireland in leSs than a fortnight. Adieu : it is needleSs to add,
How very sincerely,
I am yours,
LUCY BLANDFORD.
■ \
LETTER XXII.
FROM LADY CHARLOTTE RICHLEY TO MISS BLANDFORD.
^	Wcjlford Houfe^ vear FuHitty
Jx, MILLION of thanks to my kind Lucy for her interesting little history ' of the amiable Mrs. Douglas.—I could almost wish it could be made public, for the lesion it contains.—My pity is extreme for the unhappy woman, and her lovely little ones. See we not, that by means inScrutable, she was at length led by the kind hand of a tender watchful
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	101
ful providence, to my Lucy’s generous aid, by whoSe tender compallion every woe will be banished and every care be Softened ?—This amiable woman must, my fnend, be a pensioner of mine, as well as yours.—I'Em determined : So do not oppofe me in this matter.—The little Sophia, too, shall be my care, whilst Louifa is yours.— I do, not mean to part theSe lovely babes—but I wish to educate, and ‘	cloath, and to provide handSomely for
/ one, whilst you, my Lucy, are exercising your tender cares for the other. —Pray tell me how you intend to pro-I vide for the poor Mrs. Douglas :— but be fure remember, I shall go your halves in ashsting her.
Indeed, I long most impatiently to visit England, for is not my Melville there?—We have yet had no letter, in anfwer to our last, which is wonderful. I fear he is ill;—I fear his wound is broke out afresh;—in short, I I	E 3	feel
102	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
feel a thonSand tender anxieties on his account.—His faith., and	Lucy,
obServe, I doubt not;—no—it is his precious health for which I Suffer.
You know I am Sond of Scribbling, and Sometimes am guilty of finning in rhyme. You will be no way Surpnfed then if I inform you of a tranSgrellion I fell into lately of that kind.
I was walking last night, by moonlight, in a grove in our gardens, when the following pastoral lines, Supposing my Self that instant a ShepherdeSs, lamenting the abfence of my favourite fwain, struck into my head.
I.
What fhepherd, or nymph, of the grove,
Can blame me for dro])ping a tear,
Or wailing aloud as I rove,
Since ThyrSis no longer is here ?
My flocks if at random they Ilray,
What wonder now he’s from the plains >-His call they were wont to obey,
His beck rul’d the nymphs and the Swains,
II,	How
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	IO3
II.
How heavy the time rolls along,	*
Now ThyrSis is far from my sight!
How dull is the nightingale’s fong,
That once us’d to give Such delight !
The meadows, that erst were So green Now loSe all Uie verdure of May,
The cowflip, the vi’let, are Seen To droop, fade, and wither away.
III.
Can I ever forget how we stray’d To the foot of yon neighbouring hill.
To the bower he had built in the Ihade,
Or the river that runs by the mill ?
There, kind by my side as he walk’d.
And heard the blythe stories I told.
How Sweet was the thrulh from the Spray,
And the bleeting of lambs from the fold !
IV.
My flocks now disorderly stray
And bleet their complaints in my ear.
No more they leap, frolic, or play,
But fad as their mistrefs appear.
But, ah ! if my Thyrsis were Seen,
My flocks how they’d ikip o’er the plain !
Each flow’ret would Spring on the green,
Each nightingale charm me again.
E 4	V. For
104	^ LEssorr for lovers.
v.
For him a green arbour I’ve made,	-r
Enrich’d with each flagrant flower,
The fun’s Scorching heat it will Shade,
And ikreen him from mid-day’s fierce power.
Return then, my Shepherd, return,
Your coming no longer delay 5 O leave not your Daphne to mourn,
But hasten, my Shepherd away.
You fee I commit all my follies to the kind bofom of fnendship.—But a truce with my own tender affair, till I have expreffed the extreme delight I experience on the approaching happi-neSs of my beloved Lucy. Tour Edward next to my Melville, is the worthiest best of men.—I have lately Seen a gentleman who knows him perfectly well, and he gives him a character as amiable as estimable.—You will, however,—you muft permit me, my dear, when we meet, to laugh a little at the fure, fiber., fentimental friendjhip betwixt yon both, being converted into
downright stark-staring love,---------1 am
*	glad
A LESSON FOR LOVERS,	loy
glad you have at last taken that pretty little monySyllable into consideration.
I am convinced you will never permit it to Suffer banijiment again ; on the contrary, that you will find new beau-ties in it every day.
You aik, my Lucy, how I Spend my time in a country, where I have not cultivated a great deal of company, fearing it would break into my favourite plan of retirement. My chief amuSe-ment is reading the best authors, both ancient and modern. I often think, if our Sex would Spend a few hours every day in conversing with the dead., and examining the excellent precepts which books afford, they would find a more Solid and lasting pleaSure, a more Secret and refined Satisfaction, than can % postibiy ariSe from the applauSes of a fool, or the adoration of a coxcomb.
It is certain, the female part of the creation have more leiSure for Such improvements, and it is, I fear, equally E 5	certain,
Io6	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
certain, that they are too apt to neglect the opportunity. How lost to wiSdom, nay even to common Senfe, are Some of our Sex, who can fee no beauties in the nobleSt pages, and discover no charms in the finest writers ! Reading is an amuSement formed to Suit every mind, and calculated for every temper: an amuSement, in Spite of fortune, we may always enjoy, and which will attend us through every stage of life, and divert when we most stand in need of conSolation. Here the tender, generous mind, may fym-’ pathize with the misfortunes of the unhappy; and even rejoice at happi-neSs, though it be imaginary: here we may learn to tread in the pleasing paths of virtue, and fhun the dangers whidi Surround us : here we may fee the horrors which attend vice and guilt, and whilst we range over a field fo Spacious, extract Sweets from every flower it contains.
The
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	I07
The pleafiire of knowledge, my Lucy, is Such as no unforefeen accident can rob us of; as no time will be able to destroy. In profperity it will add a relish to our gayest hours, and in .the day of adverfity will calm our griefs* and Soften every care.
It is astonishing to me how any human being can be at a loSs for employment, and that too of the fnost agreeable kind, when the works of Such numbers are open to their view: when they may converSe with the greatest men, the most exalted geniufes the-world ever produced ; and enjoy thofe delightful contemplations, even in Solitude and retirement.
The celebrated Mr. Sheridan’s Secret for the ladies, was, he told them, of Such a nature, as would not only make them more amiable, but Secure to them abfolutc dominion over the men. His Secret, at length, was no other than to recommend the frequent
reading
1
^o8	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
reading of the tranflations of the ancients, and the beft of our English mo-
.a-	^	.
dern authors ; by which means their minds would be So cultivated, and So highly improved, as to be able to communicate fiitisfactions, as yet almost unknown to the Sejt. d'his Sensible writer, and truly ingenious man, whofe name both in Ireland and England will ever be mentioned with esteem, judiciousiy obferves, what a vulgar error it is to fuppofe that the intellectual faculties of women are not So strong as thoSe of the men. He* is convinced that we have generally quicker conceptions, better memones, and a greater volubility of foygw than the men; the lafl of which, he adds, is too proverbial to need insisting on. Why, then, Should thcfe faculties be buried in ob-Scurity ? and why should we neglect what would make many men ashamed of their owti ignorance, and neceffarily excite them to a laudable example V -	,	I do
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	IO9
I do not mean that I would have a woman Spend her whole life in laborious researches, and abstracted Sciences, which might even blunt that Jharpnefs in which She is thought to excel; every woman is certainly not a Dacier, nor a Gahriella Emilia de Bretuil,MarchioneSs de Chatelet, who explained Leibnitz, transtated Sir ISaac Newton’s Principia into French, with Notes, and wrote institutions of PhySiques; in every one of which the depth of her judgment is Shewn to all who are capable of understanding her. This Lady alone is a great and Shining proof how far female intellectual faculties may be cultivated. '
I would, however, have our Sex acquire that Sort of knowledge which is most uSeful and agreeable. Studies that can awaken a laudable cuisioSity, and lend graces to the imagination,^ is a Spacious field in which we may exerciSe
ourSelves
no	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
ourfelves with an unboundetl limitation. Natural history, and a knowledge of the terrestrial world, are agree-' able and ufeful parts of women’s studies. That portion of the former, called experimental philoSophy, in a courSe of observations and experiments, offers a Spectacle well worthy the attention of a reasonable being. But, alas ! in vain does nature pour forth her amazing wonders and exquisite beauties to the greatest part of women, and indeed of men; as few, very few, of either will give themfelves the trouble, or time, to investigate what is So wonderfully to be found in every part of this boundleSs creation.—And yet, one siiould imagine, that to be struck witli the admirable concord wdiich reigns in every part of the imiverfe, and to wiSh to know its Springs, would be natural to every one who rank's in the prder of rational beings. Nature is a large
book
A LESSON FOR LOVERS*	III
book open to all: and I often think, if Some of our prefent beauties of the age would Sometimes fix two fine Sparkling eyes upon a book, in Search of uSeful knowledge, or would they contemplate on the wonders contained even in a common field, they would not be So often bent -on unworthy objects as they uSually are.
I have lately read a work. Said to be written by a female hand, which has given me much pleaSure. Its title is,
“ Literary Amufements; or. Evening “ Entertainer.” Besides two oriental tales, equal, I think, to any thing I , ever read of the kind, there are many interesting ^ and instructive stories in common life. In Some thoughts thrown, together on the advantages of improv- -ing the mind in the female Sex, and on thoSe studies that are most proper for them, this ingenious and moral writer obferves, that “ Women are
much
112	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
much more capable of attention than is uSually imagined :—they only want plication,—If most women would be-Stow the fame time in the study of hif--tcry^ which they too often dedicate to the reading of novels and romancesthey would foon draw forth ufeful lestbns for the conduct of their lives, and, from the most interesting faBs., receive an iristruction which truth alone can give."
. There is Scarce any girl, it must be granted, who has not read, and with eagernefs too, numbers of romances and novels, many of which Serve only to corrupt the mind. But then it is but justice to acknowledge, that there are others that come not within the reach of this cenfure; on the contrary, that merit approbation : but Still 'they fall infinitely Short in improvement of real history. W orks of imagination proptrly conducted, have aliuredly their '
ufe,
/
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	II3
ufe, and the younger part of our Sex, In particular, may reaSonably be allowed fometimes to look into them ; but the warmest advocate, for this Species of writing, I believe, will confeSs it to be a fault to make them, as too many young females do, their entire Study.
Certainly, the beautiful representations which the annals of human nature bestow, are the most proper to form the heart and judgment. Women in all ages, have had So great a share in most events, and have acted So many parts therein, that we may look on Some hiStones as the regiSter of our own actions. Let us therefore reclaim our rights, and from history draw forth uSeful lesions Sor the conduct of our future lives. We may depend on it, my friend, the men, when they marry,
‘ expect Something more than mere beauty., in the women they chooSe to make the Social companions of their
lives:
I 14	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
lives: they estimate beauty only as a relative.^ an adventitious quality in a 'wife., and prize the beauteous cafket, but in proportion to the value of the intellectual jewel it contains; and hence it is, that the Britisti females have it in their power to claim a fupenority over all the Sex in the world; as the endowments of the mind confer an ad-' ditional lustre on the advantages of perfon., for which they are So justly celebrated. Men may like to hear us stng, —to play on various instruments,—to fee us lead the dance,—but, alas! thofe acquisitions, though agreeable, are, at best, but fpJendid accomplishments that attract for the moment: So true, is it, that nothing can be long prized but sterling SenSe and genuine virtue. *
“ Sacred, fubstantial, never-fading good !”
Write, my Lucy, and let it be Soon, for be affured your letters, next to
thofe
A LESSON fOR LOVERS.	I15
tliofe of one,, whom it is needleSs to mention, give the most unfeigned delight to,
Your moSt faithful,
And affectionate,
CHARLOTTE RICHLEY.
P. S. My father has had an attack of the gout; but as he is better, hopes Soon to revifit England.
LETTER XXIIL
MISS BLANDFORD TO LADY CHARLOTTE RICHLEY,
South-grove, July 10.
IjjREAT was the pleaSure my dearest Charlotte’s very agreeable pacquet afforded her Lucy ; but, alas ! like all other pleaSures in this world, it had its alloy!—Need I fay the bitter drop, that poiSoned the rich cup, was the
little
Il6	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
little hopes you give of very Speedily returning ?—I repeat fpeedUy,, for my Edward, begins to be extremely inu portunate, forSooth, for an early day to crown, as he calls it, his happineSs: —and I have always fet my heart Oft it, if that event ever ffoould happen, that my Sweet friend would be my bride-maid.—Well! I must not repine at what cannot be helped.
You will, my dear, naturally Sup-poSe from this hafle of my now avowed lover, that he has at length heard for a certainty, that the dottbt vtith. regard to the lady in the West-Indies, is now at an end.—It is : for before his friend, whom I mentioned to you in my last, could Set out on his voyage, a most authentic account of the particulars of her death arrived from her nearest relations. My beloved father, whom you love, as much as I do yours, is almost in as great a hurry to have the important
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	II7
portant affair (need I Say marriage?) concluded, as my lover is.
“ Well Lucy,” he Says, “ when is your day fixed? you never can meet with Such another man as Sir Edward Willis. (Indeed, my dear, I am of my father’s opinion.) You are above all trifling., child, on this occasion.”
To fay truth, my Charlotte, to trifle., as my father calls it, with a man under the Sanction oifriendJJ?ip., with whom I have So long corresponded, and to whom I have, in a manner, laid my poor, unSuSpecting heart quite open on a thouSand occasions;—I Say now to raiSe objections—now to draw mySelf up, with a—“ Pray, Sir, Wait my time, I beSeech you,”—would be a ndiculous affectation, of which I am not capable. —I have, indeed, often thought, with my favourite author RichardSon, that the woman who once brings herSelf to correspond with a man, though not immediately on the Subject of love^
lays
Il8	A LESSON FOR LOVfiRS.
lays herfelf under a kind of- delicate obligation: at least I think it is a kind of tacit acknowledgment, that the fnend, So favoured, is far from being diSagree-able. A designing, artful man will easily turn the lady’s good opinion into his own private advantage. I think the poor unhappy Clariffa, near her last moments, obferves, to her exalted Anna Howe, that She may, perhapsdate her misfortunes to herfelf, in So early giving her vile Seducer So particular an encouragement as to correfpond with him, by letters, on Some Subjects of geography and ‘hiStory, before he commenced her lover ; which, as She justly obferves, from her sitting down regularly to write him long letters, even on thoSe Subjects, indifferent as they were, yet to fuch a man, they certainly gave him a hint he was not difagreeabk to his lovely correspondent.^—It is true, my dear, this man you will Say was a Lovelace) and Heaven forbid there Should
be
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	II 9
be many of that vile stamp.—Whilst my fnend and correspondent, I have every reaSon to believe, is a Sir Charles Gratidifon..
Your tender pity and consideration for poor Mrs. Douglas, and her fa-therlefs babes, is all noble—all humane, like the rest of your condust. But, my Sweet fnend, you have So many penstoners—So many widows—So many orphans, who daily taste your bounty, and in the words of Scripture, “ are" warmed by the fleece of your cloath-ing,” that Surely, you might allow me Some Small merit in taking the avhole of this little diSb^eSTed family to my-Self.—But what can I Say in this matter ?—you luiU have your own way in theSe things.—Well then—Sophia, the 4 very prettiest little Smiling cherub you ever Saw Shall be your care, and LouiSa mine.—As twins, it is curious to ob-Serve their affection as uSual in that affinity. When I See them fondly bestowing
120	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
stowing on each what each is most ardently wishing for herfelf., I am ready to cry out with that Sweet poet Waller, on his Seeing two favourite twins;
Tell me lovely, loving pair,
“ Always to yourfelves fo dear.”
At preSent, Mrs. Douglas remains in the cottage. I have preSented her with a bank bill of fifty pounds, with apparel for herSelf and little ones, of all forts, and constantly fend her what our table affords every day. My Edward {my., I repeat, for hang all affectation) is anxious to fee her, which he has not yet done ; for, whenever I have hitherto made my little visits to her, he has had the goodneSs to sit down to read to my father, or to endeavour to amufe him by a repetition of many little pleasing stories. How does this amiable man endear himfelf to me by a thouSand namelefs ashduities, and attentions to my beloved parent!—In
that,
A LTSSON TOR LOVERS.	I'2t
Short, my dear, I love him—as well—
'	almost as well—as you do your Melville.
‘	We., that is my Edward and I, are go-
I ing to ramble this fine evening in Some of the romantic Situations of groves and hills, with which this beautiful Spot abounds ; and most: probably we Shall call at the little cottage of Mrs. Douglas. My lover has no Small cu-isiofity to See that amiable woman, as I have told him a /ew particulars of her interesting story—-though but a few.
He is now playing So melodiousty on his German flute, just under my window, that you muSt excuSe my present inattention to my pen.—1 Adieu, therefore, till to-morrow.
The hour of walking is now arrived, as Milton Says,
Sweet hour of prime,
“ Nov/ is the cool, the fragrant time.’*
Just returned from a delightful walk, I take up my pen, to Say I have made a most pleaSing diScovery—But as you VOL, n,	F ' wish
122	A LESSON EOR. LOVERS.
wish me to be always minute., take the particulars as follow.
Edward, and his Lucy, in the courSe of their Sweet ramble this evening, at length crept up the winding path that leads to the little cottage of Mrs. Douglas, the Scenes whereof were picture Sc|ue beyond deScisiption.
T'he evening being Sweetly Serene and warm, we found the amiable inhabitant of the humble flraw-rooffed cot, fitting at her Spinning-wdieel under a large elm in her garden, whilst the little Sophia and LouiSa were playing by her fide :—but imagine my astonishment, when my lover, fixing his eyes on Mrs, Douglas, Suddenly exclaimed,—“ Good Heavens ! is it poS-fible	Yes—no—yes it is—it is my ‘
coufin Sophy Morley, of West Abbey, in Devonshire 1”
.	“ Gracious
*■ The critical reader may perhaps here wonder that MiSs Blandford, in her mentioning Several par-'	.	ticulars
A LTS30N FOR LOVRRS.	12^
Gracious Being,” Said fhe in the fainemoment,“doI live to fee my cousin Edward ?“Oh I” continued fhe, endea^ vounng to nSe from her wheel, “ tell me—tell me—if indeed you are Son to my uncle Willis ?”
I thought for my part She would have fainted.—Indeed this pleasing diS-covery beggars all deScription ; I cannot do the Scene justice. Suffice it to Say, Sir Edward ran to Mrs. Douglas, embraced her with all the tender kind-neSs of a near, and dear relation; whilst ' the Sweet woman returned his embrace, with a modest joy, and a kind of ebaf-dened rapture, beautiful to behold.
Imagine my astonisiiment, who stood staring by all this time,
■ticulars to Sir Edward, relative to Mrs. Douglas’s story, had omitted to mention the name of West Abbey, in Devonlhire, or indeed her maiden name 5 but thofe minute circumstances She had never men^* tioned, as not thinking them any ,way material.
She had often talked of the amiable woman as an f object of distrefs, but no farther,
j ?	F 2	A numbei:
124	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
A number of questions were ashed on both sides, in the fame instant, and I at once gathered, that Sir Edward Willis is So nearly	to this amiable
woman, as to be her firfi cousin ; his mother being her father’s sister ;—that they were almost bred up together from children. Sir George Willis, the father, having a feat very near the Abbey.—I learnt likewife that on the death of Lady Willis, her difconfo-late huSband left Devonshire, taking the young Edward his only child, with him to an estate of his, in the north of England.
This event happening about the time of Mifs Morley being fent to the boarding fchool, as before menticKned in her Story, accounts for Sir Edwapd having not been made acquainted, by not being on the Spot, with the particular circumstances of his cousin’s love-affair with Mr. Douglas. He had heard in general of her elopement with
Some
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	125
Some gay young man, and that his good uncle had been, Some time, no more.
Sir Edward’s long abfence afterwards from England, on his travels, prevented him from hearing any more of her transactions, any farther than the general cry of the world, that “ MiSs Morley was ruined—was un-done^—and, moSl: probably, by death, had fallen a victim to her own folly.” You will imagine, my dear Charlotte, the extreme joy and Surprife of my lover on this occasion.—He now took the little Sophia and LouiSa in his arms, and tenderly kisiing them, exclaimed, “ Gracious Heaven !” (that instant reflecting on what mtjl have been their Sufferings, and glancing his benevolent eye at the fordid cottage,
. —the Spinning wheel,—Sec.—whilst the tear of tender humanity flowed down his manly check, “ Gracious Heaven I” Said he, “ could my uncle F 3	behold
126	A LESSaN FOR LOVERS.
behold his darling, his Sophia, in this poor dwelling !—this lonely cot !—• —could he fee theSe lovely babes, fmiling in-poverty
“ O ceaSe my beloved cousin,” siiid the Sweet woman bursting into tears, “ my mad—my rash folly merits all—^ all I have Suffered :—nay more. It was I, that Sent my poor parent to the grave ;—it was I—”
“ Come, interrupted I, who had been weeping at this affecting Scene, “ Come, let us forget the past—and enjoy the prefent unexpected happi-neSs,—Come let us have a sillabub on the honey-Suckle bench.”
This little repast being prepared, we fat down in perhaps one of the most rural, Sweetest Spots in the world an universal joy appeared throughout the whole happy groupe.—My amiable Edward took the little Sophia and LouiSa and placed them on each knee; —and whilst he was delighted with
their
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	I27
their Smiles and innocent prattle, he was every moment exclaiming, as was his lovely kinfwoman, “ Can it be ? —Do I live to behold you again ?’’ And at intervals they both recollected and repeated many pleaSurable Schemes they had been engaged in, in their early days.
“ Do you remember, Said my lover, when in attempting to climb an old wdllow, that grew over the moat at the Abbey, m order, coufin Sophy, (for fo he still calls her) to procure you a beautiful goldfinch, that I misted my Told, and falling into the water below, had very nearly lost my life for your fake ?—^Or do you remember, how often I uSed to play truant, from the School in the neighbourmg village, to play at blind-man’s-buff, in the hall ■ at the Abbey ?—aye, many a good whipping-bout have I Suffered for your silked
.4
F 4	y And
12'S	A LESSON FOR LOVER?.
“ And have you forgot,” Slid the Sweetly Smiling Mrs. Douglas, “ how-many bushels of peaches and nedannes, I have stolen from the garden walls for you—To the last moment of my life 1 shall never forget the pretty little white horle you gave me wsith the stowing mane.—I remember, I cryed, when I went to the boarding Sdiool, to be obliged to leave k behind me.”
In thefekind of pleasing recollections, and in a thoufand old stories of former happy days, did the minutes inSensibly pafs.—The evening shades began now to prevail,—and at length the amiable cousins were obliged to part for that evening.
My good father on hearing, at our return, of this interesting meeting, and* that the unfortunate but worthy wo~ man, is the real very nearest relation Sir Edward Willis,, (his now fon-in-hm eleIl) has in the world, most kindly insists on my fending the coach to-morrow
A LESSON FOR LOVERS. ^	129
row for her and the pretty little ones, to come at once to reside under our roof, till we have found an agreeable retreat for this amiable family, near us at Richley park.—My father, has an elegant little villa, situated almost between the Seat of Sir Edward Willis and ours, in the Same county, which pretty habitation, we think, will be very eligible for the purpofe.—Sir Edward hopes the odd old humourist, to whom his uncle left his estate may be brought to do Something for this amiable family-^—he will try., at least, he
fays, what may be done.-------He Says,,
he thinks he remembers Douglas at the university; that he was a remarkable fine figure ; and had wit, and Shining parts, in a very Superior degree..
Pity, my Charlotte, that theSe men;
' . of fucb extrmrdhmry. gefims, andi w/V,, Should make uSe o£ them, ter their own ttuer ruin,. So often as they do !l there are many of thefe great geniujesy who F 5	in
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
in fact pofTeSs every fenfe, but common fenfe.
Sir Edward can hardly restrain for a • moment, his astonishment at this diS-covery of his beloved cousin. They were, I find, from their similar age, and being nurSed and bred up under one roof, shore like a brother and sister, than the former relation. “ My God, (he exclaimed in our evening walk lioshe) is it pofsible I should find Sophia, whofe most indulgent parent" would hardly Suffer
“ The winds of heaven, to vifit her too roughly?”
She, who had many attendants at her command, who was cloathed in the m.ost delicate attire, and fared “ Sumptuoufly every day	is it pof-
fible, I Say, that I should find this darling of all who knew her in a mttd-huih hovel, earning her daily bread,— in an obScuisity almost impervious to the human eye ; and who, but for you, my generous Lucy (he was pleaSed to
s^t)
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	I3I
shy) perhaps at this very moment, would have been destitute of a morfel of bread to Support finking nature ! Gracious Heaven, how wonderful art thou in thy diSpenfations to us poor mortals ! and by what methods doSt thou bring thy everlasting purpoSes to perfection, by means nnSeen by human eye !’' -“ She must have been,” Said I, ‘‘ before her calamities,—nay now she is, a very lovely woman.”
“ She still retains,” returned Sir Edward, “ the Same beautiful features which, when a girl, she was fo remarkable for. I have not feen her fince file iFas a girl, it is true, but the little red strawberry-mark, under her left eye, which I have kiffed in play a hundred times, her penetrating eyes, i—and in short her every feature, made ' it imposhble I should not recollect her. Fler Stature is certainly greatly en-creafed, but She was at the age of twelve, remarkably tall, which makes
her
1^2	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
her perSon SBll lefs difficult to recol-lefl. Her excellent father was an honour to human nature: his probity, his benevolence—his whole life which was one continued Series of virtuous actions, will long render him deferv-edly lamented, as a public lofs.—I was abroad when his death reached my ears my heart felt it very Sensibly : but little did I then know my cousin Sophy was Slruggling with the miSeries attendant on a bad huSband, joined with poverty.’^
I cannot expreSs, my beloved Char^ lotte, how much pleaSure this agreeable incident has given me.-—In Mrs. Douglas I shall have a companion,—-a relation,—a friend.—Heaven has indeed rewarded me mofl amply in her., in each of thofe titles, for any little pecuniary matters, I may have been able to shew her. You will be charmed with my acquisition.—So unaffected—So artlefs—and Sensible is she,
I am
A LESSON FOR LOVERS. '	133
I am highly pleaSed with your paS-toral ode; and have you this moment Standing before me, in idea, in the dreSs of an Arcadian fhepherdefs, with your crook, and your Snowy stock feed-iiig by your fide.—In return for what you have been So obliging to Send, I encloSe an ode, on a singing bird :«— but take notice I do not give it you as my own.—It is the prodmstion of a much lamented friend of my Edward, who died a few years since.—Here it follows.
ODE TO A SINGING BIRD.
I.
O thou that gladft my lonely hours,
V/ith many a'wildly warbling fong,
When melancholy round me lowers,
And drives her fallen storms along j When fell adverfity prepares,
To lead her delegated train,
Pale ficknefs, want, remorfe, and pain,
With all her host of carking cares,
The fiends ordain’d to tame the human foul,
And give the humbled foul to fympathy’s controul.
Sweet
134	^ LESSON FOR LOVERS.
II.
Sweet Soother of my mis’ry fay,
Why dofl thou clap thy joyous wing ?
Why dost: thou pour that artlefs lay ?
How canst thou, little prifoner, Sing ?
Hast thou not caufe to grieve,
That man, unpitying man, has rent From thee the boon which nature meant Thou Ihouldst as well as he receive ?
The power to woo thy partner in the grove?
To build where instimst points?—Where chance* direists to rove ?
III.
Perchance, unconfcious of thy fate,.
And to the woes of bondage blind, .
Thou never longst to join thy mate,.
Nor wifliest to be unconfin’d :
Then how relentlefs he,
And fit for ev’ry foul offence.
Who could bereave Such innocence Of life’s best blessing, liberty;
Who lur’d thee, guileful, to his treach’rous Snare,, To live a tuneful ssave, and dissipate his care !
IV.
But why for thee this fond complaint ?
Above thy master thou art blest;
Art thou not free ? Yes. Calm content,"
With olive Sceptre Sways tny breast.
Then
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	I3y
Then deign with me to live.
The falcon with inSatiate maw,
Shall ne’er thy destiny contrive,
And ev’ry tabby foe fhall mew in vain,
Whilst pensively demure, Ihe hears thy melting strain.
V.
Nor fhall the fiend, fell famine, dare Thy wiry tenement astail:
Tliefe, thefe fhall be my constant care.
The limpid fount and temp’rate meal:
And when the blooming Spring,
In checquer’d liv’ry robes the fields,
The fairest flowerets nature yields.
To thee officious will I bring:
A garland rich, thy dwelling fhall entwine.
And Flora’s frefhest gifts, thrice happy bird, be thine.
Whatever may be your opinion of the compofition of the above little ode, you will I doubt not approve the fen-timents., being as they are, on your favourite Subject—tender humanity to a little prisoner in his wiry priSon.—I am interrupted.
Wednefdaf
I3si A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
Wednefday evening.
I HAVE the pleaSure of informing yon, that our coach has, this day, brought from the cottage, the worthy Mrs. Douglas and her two Sweet girls. —We are delighted with our gueSfs. The amiable mother behaves with all thdt eafy politeneSs which is die true characterrSdc of a gentlewoman. The children, all Smiling innocence and 'beauty, are amazed with all they fee and hear. Having always been accustomed to the most wretched Scenes of poverty, the lovely innocents cannot fuf-fieiently exprefs their wonder to See So large a houfe—to fee fuch a number of attendants—of which they could have no idea. They curtsied to our footmen, as to So many fine gentlemen; and at dinner (all simple,, beautiful nature, without art) exclaimed, “ O mamma, how many dishes are here !
'—look, Sophy, at m^ fine plate.”
y And
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	137
“ And mine,'’ Said the little Louifit, observing the figures on the china, “ is covered with pretty flowers.”
Mrs. Douglas, dear woman, gave them a fignificant wink to be silent— but my father, who, as well as Sir Edward, was delighted with their pretty prattle, desired they might be entirely at liberty; for that they both were always charmed with the workings of ftmple nature without constraint; and that they were convinced, they could never See it to Such perfection as in the prefent instance.	,
On our retiring afterwards into the drawing room, the gilded pictures, the rich furniture, &c. were freili matters of SurpriSe to thefe Sweet little prattlers* Their extreme delight at the novelty of the Scenes around them, drew tears of maternal fondnefs from their amiable mother.
“ Merciful Heaven!” She cried looking round, “ teach me to bear this
astonishing
I3S	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
astonishing change with moderation, and humble thankfulnefs !—Do you not wish,” added the Sweet woman fmiling through her tears, ‘‘ do you not wiSh, my little Sophy, to know how the poor robiivred-breash does which you left behind you m the roSe bush at the cottage?”
“ Yes, for the foor robin, mamma, I should like to go there once again—but indeed I had rather See theSe fine things.”
, “ Ah nature! nature!” Said the tender ^ Mrs. Douglas.—She here Seemed op-prested with what she called her gratitude.—She burst into tears, and empha-tically exclaimed,—“ O MiSs Bland-ford—how—how shall we—”
I interrupted her.
“ I beSeech you, dear Madam, to restrain the Sentiments of your waim —your grateful heart, which abundantly over-rates any trifling little matters^
we
■
A LESSON FOR LOVERS..	139
we are doing, or may do for So much merit.”
.	Friday morn.
I date again, my dear friend, to Say,
I that we are all on Monday next to Set out for Richley park. We go through London, where we purpoSe staymg about a fortnio;ht;—and where I am .—Charlotte 1—where I am to make preparations it Seems for a very early day. TheSe men, child (my dear father, and my Edward) drive' on at a Jirange rate—Well—if it muft be /c, it muft I think.—Adieu, most probably this will be the last letter you will ever receive from,
Your devoted,
LUCY BLANDF0RD>
LETTER
140	A LESSON FOR LOyiRS.
LETTER XXIV.
LADY W^ILLIS TO LADY CHARLOTTE RICHLEY IN IRELAND.
Hanover Square^ Jtdy 24-.
My Dear Friend,
In one poor fortnight, from the date of my laSt epistle, am I metamorphofed from the laughing, Sprightly Lucy Blandford, into (however a much happier character) the Sober, affectionate ivife.—Yes, my dear Lady Charlotte, ‘‘ Yesterday’s Sun, Saw the awful ceremony performed!”—At St. George’s church, Hanover Square, where So many timid, blushing damSels have resigned their liberty, as well as your poor Lucy, did I vow eternal obedience, love, &c. to my worthy Edward.-^ You will think, perhaps, I have been in wondrous haste to have this matter
concluded,.
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	I41
concluded.—Over-perftmded, child !— that w^as the cafe.—I was most power-fully befet, to Say the truth.—On one fide, the best of fathers;—on the other., the fondest of lovers ; and Mrs. Douglas too, dear woman! would not let me rest.—All thefe good people were in a kind of combination;—were all firmly bent (I Saw through their whole design not to let me have a moment’s rest, till I had aIhtaUy fixed the day : and to confefs the honeSt truth, I had 2i powerful pleader in my own bofom.— In Short, for the Sake of peace and quiet, on ail sides, I gave at once into the Snare that was laid for me.—I repent not however.—Need I Say that my beloved huSband is all rapture or that my excellent parent is at this moment one of the most delighted of beings? He gave my hand at the altar with visible Satisfaction.—Well 1 it is a most awful ceremony,—that’s certain; but
as
142-	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
as you will So Soon go through the whole of it, I Shall not pretend to deScribe it.
Mrs. Douglas attended me to church, and I must inform you of the following pleaSing circumstance, as it gave me Singular pleaSure.
On our stepping into our carriage, as well as in alighting on our return from the awful Solemnity, I was most agreeably furpnSed to See the little beautiful twins, Sophia and Louifa, ha-bitated in an extreme pretty Arcadian kind of dreSs, standing at the door with each a balket of flowers on her arm.—On our alighting from the carriage, theSe lovely children began strewing the way before us with flowers, through the hall and paffages leading to the drawing-room ; obferving all the way, a most profound silence, and walking just before us, as they had been instructed, by their amiable mother to do, who it feems had privately concerted this very pleasing compli-
mefit.
r
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	143
ment.—Was it not a Sweet thought? We were delighted with it. TheSe beautiful little angels attended the bride and bridegroom the whole dry, in their pretty fancied drefs and character.
Mrs. Douglas, my now agreeable kinfwom.m, isiSes every hour, if possible, in my esteem and admiration.—Her virtues are great and many:—-her heart is good and tender; She has great Sen-Sibility, of which she has given me a proof that has much affected me.
She came juft now into my clofet, and after Some little talk of the happi-nefs of hearts being united in the married State as well as hands \ she tenderly exclaimed; “ Ah! my dear Madam, / o?ice was happy as yott now are -I once had a fond—an affectionate huf-' band, of whofe fidelity and tenderneSs I could no more have entertained a doubt, than I could of the evidences- of my own Senfes.—Happy—happy Lady
Willis!"
144	^ LESSON FOR LOVERS.
Willis!’’ continued the Sweet woman w^eeping, “ your angel has been watchful over your fate;—but mine has Slept, regardleSs of its charge.”
I was much affedled.—After fome little talk on this Subject, fhe at length cunfeffed to me, that, in Spite of the extreme falfhood— the deceit—and ingratitude of her huSband—fhe yet could not hate him.—“ Hate, do I fay.?”—
exclaimed fhe,----“ No------wretched
though he has made me, yet I can never hate the father of my precious children. He was the firft, the only man for whom I ever Sighed, or ever fhall.—Fain—fain would I try to extenuate, in Some degree, his guilt.— Who knows. Lady Willis,” continued fhe, with an earnest concern in her manner, “ but that' the thoughtleSs, and perhaps too fond MiSs Summers, might be herSelf as culpable as him— There was certainly, 'well as I once loved her, a freedom,—a boldneSs in her ' '	manner.
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	145
manner, which might probably invite., rather	forbid his advances.—I fear,
indeed, my poor friend, was rather of a giddy, dillipated turn, before the fatal journey to London, which, alas ! has been the destruction of us all.”
“ Ah i my dear Sophia,” Said I, gently wiping a tear from her languid cheek, how ready are we to try to find an cxcufe for thofe we loveV
Pardon,” laid she, “ my weak-iiefs—but—but he is my hujhandS^
Call it not weakneSs, my amiable -friend,” returned I, “ I term it the highest effort of heroic generoSity to forgive Such injuries.”
I have been hurried fo fast into this stime state of matrimony, that I have not had time fufficient to have all my neceffary appendages of the bridal ' state ; but milliners, mantua-makers, and jewellers, are ail bufily employed for my ladyjhip,—I am at. preSent in- ■ ‘ cog; and shall fee no company whilst voL. II.	G	lam'
146	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
I am in town:—indeed, at this SeaSon of the year, there is very little to be found here.
You will direct to me, my beloved friend, to Richley park; to which place we go next week, and where we lhall stay Some little time before we return to our own Seat.—-I am charged not to forget my hujhand.s—(how new that found!)—most kind and reSpectful compliments with my father’s.—What will the good Earl Richley Say to my marriage?-—You know he always called me his femtL—Farewell, my dearest friend.
Yours, most truly,
LUCY WILLIS.
LETTER
f
i	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	I47
LETTER XXV.
FROM LAST CHARLOTTE RICHLEY TO LADY WILLIS,
Y	Wefiford Hojife^ near T>nblin,
Joy—^joy—my beloved fisiend ! the warmed: congratulations a sincere heart can dictate attend my Lucy, Sir Edward Willis, and your reSpectable father, on a marnage which gives me nnSpeakable Satisfaction,
If I could have one moments regret^ in this general SeaSon of joy, it is, that I was not afiisiant at the awful ceremony, either as bride-maid, or with the little lovely Sophia and Louifa strewing the path with flowers, for your ladyship and the happy bridegroom.
My father fends his particular congratulations, though you have doomed him, he Says, to a perpetual wearing tlie willow for your fake. He is re^ G 2	joiced
14-8	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
joiced you have made choice of a man So worthy of you: in Short, lam convinced every one who knows you wHl rejoice. But your little fnend Cupid, I fear, will murmur at it exceedingly : he had many accufations against you before, and for that reafon afferts, that this theft is the more ag- | gravating, becaufe it is not the firjl of which your ladyship has been guilty.
He is, however, determined you shall not think he has been driven to^ de-Spair: the little god knows too well his power was never fo advantageouSly placed, as with my Lucy; and as the only refource to keep it there, he is become friends with his brother deity, Hymen. For your fake, all their former animofities and enmities are entirely over: they have even entered into a treaty which is to be binding for many years. It was Signed in great form upon your wedding-day. i On h is part, Cupd promifes to be the
lover,
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	I49
lover, as long as Hymen fball be the * hulbaiid : it remains for yon, my dear, to fectpA their union, and to cloSe the bands which unite them. If I might adviSe, Cupid’s wings Should abSolutely ^bc cut; otherwise he may, in Some unguarded moment, forget the treaty, fly away, n|id then, unable to vindicate himfelf, proclaim war against Hymen ; and, if it ever comes to that, all good faith will be ir-recoverably broken.	^
Hymett must be miferable, when love enjoys no happineSs. Tour liappineSs, my Sweet friend, depends on theirs : their ^ good or bad understanding, will either Sweeten or imbitter your days.—But why do I talk of any days but happy ones?
•—ThoSe who know Lady Willis, will know, likewife, they muji pafs on in peace and-innocence. Had I a muSe at my elbow, you Should certainly have an epithalamium on this occasion:
—but, indeed, no muSe of mine is e-epal to the stibject;—So you must G 3	even
‘	150	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
even be content, in plain profe, with my fmcerefl wishes for every happineSs to attend von.
I am delighted to hear you have found, in the v/orthy Mrs Douglas, not only a pleasing companion, but ah fo a relation.—^I hope, and doubt not, that the all-wife difpenfer of events, who has tried her virtues in adversity, will abundantly reward them in prosperity. You, my incomparable friend, are the guardian angel whom heaven | Sent to her aid. I am much interested with her affecting history, and beg you will continue to be very minute concerning her.
Where, on earth, can this dear man,—this Melville, be?—or what can he be doingHe certainly must have received our last paquet —but how astonishing is it, he should never an-fwer it 1—My weak heart is full of |
This was, unfortunately, what the baSe MiSs Freelove had intercepted.
fears '
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	15I
fears for his health.—But pardon me,' my Sweet friend, for disturbing your preSent felicity with my Simple anxieties, and tender fears.
Adieu 1 all imaginable compliments of congratulation attend your caro fpoSo ; and believe me to be unalterably, in every Situation,
most Sincerely your :	affectionate friend,
CHARLOTTE RICHLEY.
LETTER XXVI.
* SIR HENRY BELLMOUR TO COLONEL MELVILLE.
ILondon,f July 20.
HOPED ere this, my dear Charles, to have acc]^uainted you I was become
“ BenediBy
* Several letters, previous to this, had pasted lately between theSe worthy friends, but they are G 4	not
152	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
“ Benedict., the married mrm” and one of the happiest of human beings; but an unfortunate affair, which has juft happened in my family, has retarded my felicity for a short time. Be not,
' however, alarmed, I am well,—per-fectly well in health ; as is likewife my lovely Patty ;—in whom I, if poffible, discover a frefli charm every day.—-But, not to keep you a Single moment in SuSpenSe, relative to the above unfortunate affair I mentioned at the beginning of my letter, take the following particulars:
I think you must remember, when you and I were at Venice, a remarkable well-looking youth, of a most pleaf-ing addrefs, who came to offer him-felf to me as a Valet de chambre ; and that I took him into my Service, and favoured him (as he appeared above the
not infertecl, as containing little more than the joy each expressed on the pleasing profpedl of being both Soon united to thofe they loved.
common j
A LESSON f6R lovers.	153
Gommon rank of domestics) with every mark of esteem his merits demanded. —You may postibly perhaps remember this young man by the name of Roz-zelli, butj if not, I must proceed to fay, he poffested, among other ufeful requisites, many agreeable talents; particularly an uncommon fine taste and execution in music :—on the lute he excelled.—His father, he told me, was a Venetian musician, but that, having a large family, he choSe to enter into Service.
This amiable young, man was my a* manuensis; and-, from his extreme attachment and fidelity, exemplified in a thoufand instances, gained my confir dence,—and I ought to Say likewiSe, my gratitude; as he nSqued his own life to Save mine.
Soon after you left me in Italy, I had, on occasion of a quarrel about a lady, on whofe account I was, however, perfectly Innocent, incurred the G 5	hatred
154	LESSON FOR LOVERS.
hatred and revenge of an Italian nobleman of very high rank.
One evening, as I was returning to iny lodgings, with no other attendant | but my faithful Servant, I was befet by three bravos, two of whom knocked me down, whilst the other villain stabbed me in my breast, with a ftilletto. They left me, as they imagined, for dead, and immediately made their e-fcape. My poor Rozzelli conveyed me, weltering in my blood as I was, to my apartments ; and, weeping over me with the tendered care, got all | imaginable help.—My Surgeons immediately pronounced I was a dead man, for that my wound had been given | with a poifoned weapon ; a cruelty peculiar to Some nations, where frantic jealoufy is predominant. I was re-stgned to my fate,—but my trusty valet was inconSolable—and wept without ceaSmg. At length, my Surgeons having left me as incurable, I fell into
a stumber
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	155
a Slumber of Some hours, and, on a-waking, found mySelf amazingly better.—I Saw Rozzelli fitting by my fide, who Seemed overjoyed at my vifible change for the better.—^To be brief, in one week I was So well, as to have no complaint left but weakneSs :—-but -I was extremely concerned to find my faithful Servant ill, and daily drooping.
I found the poifon from my wound had been extracted ; and, from many circumstances, began to conclude the above poor youth had performed that ^ most exalted of all heroic acts, of risking his own life to Save mine, by Sucking the poifon from my wound; and, at length, he confested, that, whilst I was steeping, he had applied his lips to the part affected.—Imagine my a-stonishment!—I instantly putstnto his hands, a purfe filled with a large Sum of money ; but this, to my still further amazement, he refuSed, and with even a degree of diSdain,——in truth,
could
^56	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
could be no equivalent return for So wonderful an a£l of exalted kindnefs.
—I endeavourcd, however, to make his Situation as comfortable as poSIible, and his health began, at length, to be better; but I always obferved a penfive melancholy in his countenance, for which I could not account.
It is needlefs to fay how much his astonishing fidelity and cai*e for my ' welfare, in a number of instances, had endeared the excellent youth to my regard.-—But to come to the distrefsr fill point.
For thefe last fix weeks, Rozzelli has visibly declined in health ; neither could any perfuasions prevail on him to have the advice which his languishing state required.—But guefs, my i dear Melville, my astonishment a few days since, when (as I was sitting with my Patty, and her amiable friend Mifs Millwood, who is come to us, on account of the approaching nuptials) one
of I
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	157
of my Servants came hastily into the room, and begged me to go to Mr. Rozzelli, for that he was So much worSe, as to be believed just departing.
—Imagine my concern.—I ran instantly to his apartment, where I indeed found the poor, inestimable youth, visibly drawing to his last moments.—
He was Supported by pillows, whilst a death-like palenefs was Spread, over his languid countenance.
“ My dear Rozzelli,” Said I, “ how do you ?”
This—this is kind indeed,” returned he in broken, trembling accents,
“ to Smooth my passTage to eternity !—
I am juft—^just going,—but yet cannot	i
depart, till, Oh !—but promiSe me your forgivenneSs :—Say you will forgive a wretched—
“ Forgive 1”-^---Said I, affected to
tears, “ my beloved Rozzelli, I would do every thing to Save and Serve you.
—What can I do for you ?”
y Alas!
138 A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	!
“ Alas ! Nothing—nothing can now be done,” Said the poor dying youth ;
“ but—where—where is your dear hand ?”
He took it, and faintly preffing it to his lips—(I was astonished—but almost I petrified with amazement, when he continued in feeble accents inimitably affecting;—and at this moment, my Patty fearing the worst had happened, had gently stolen into the room, and was, unperceived by my poor Rozzelli,
listening)---“ No, all aid is vain:—
I feel the powerful hand of death—but cannot—cannot leave you, till I have revealed I am—I am—-a wretched wo* man !”
“ Good God !” exclaimed I, “ I am all amazement!—pray proceed !”
“ Have you forgot,” she faintly con- ' tinned, “ the Lady Laura DAumarez, I only child to the Marquis De Loretto?
—I am that unfortunate woman :—J am that once happy daughter ;—who,
through
%
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	I59
through the exceSs of a tender, but hopelefs passion, left my father’s houSe,
-—blind,—lost,—to every thing but my unhappy passion, for Jou, my BellmourV i—(O Melville ! imagine my amazement at this astonissiing difcovery !)—•
“ I difguiSed mySelf in the habit of a page—and thus got admittance to yoyr adored preSence, under the guiSe of an humble domestic.—To be near you,— to See you daily,—to watch, with ten-derest care, your every request, were all—to me an infinity of happineSs !—
You may possibly recollect you Saw, two Succeeding nights, at the opera at Venice, a young lady of quality, with whom you converSed, and led to her
chair.----I am that unhappy woman,
who, alas ! from the first hour I Saw you, may date my mifery.”
“ O heavens!” Said I, ‘‘ is it possible.^
—I do,—I indeed recollect having Seen	^
the lovely Laura,—Proceed, dearest . .	Madam,
l6o	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
Madam, with your most distresting dif-COvery.”
Melville,—file was the lovely woman, whom nothing but her high rank, and my then very moderate circumstances, my father being at that time alive,
■
would have prevented me from addreS-Smg.—You have often heard me mention her with rapture. I had Seen her, indeed, hxxtdivice ; but that was enough to complete her conquests.—^Ishe dear woman thus proceeded:
“ What more,:—what more can I -
fay ?----Pity me,—and Sometimes be- /
stow a thought on the dying Laura D’Aumarezd’
* It may, perhaps, appear furprifmg, that Sir	'
Henry Bellmour Should not re^iollest, in his Valet, the features of ^this beautiful Venetian lady ; but ■whoever conSiders the extreme difierence which the habits of the fexes make, joined with Rozzelli’s al- [| ways wearing a large black patch on one eye, made fuch a thought impollible to enter the Baronet’s head.
I was
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	16 l
I was affected beyond the power of utterancb :—I raiSed her languid head, and placed it on my bofom.
“ What—what return can I make,” Said I, in broken accents, “ to that incomparable friend, wha So- nobly Saved me from death ?”
Indeed, my fnend, to Say truth, I had almoSl: forgotten, at that wretched moment, that I was under the most Solemn ties',—the most binding pro-iniSes taanother woman,—to my beloved Patty.—I had almoji added, to that which I had already Said,—Live— live my incomparable friend, I will reward thy pafiion but the dear generous maid, to whom I am betrotl> ed. Sprang forward, from where fhe had been concealed from the dying lady, and, falling on her knees by the bedside, with inimitable tenderneSs and Sensibility, contributed to the most heartfelt Scene the human mind could feel.
No—-
162	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
“ No—no,”—Said my Sweet Patty,
“ no, madam, you Shall not die:— Bellmour Shall be yours, you Shall be his.—Let not me, wretched maid, as I am, be the foie ohjiacle, as I undoubtedly am, to the union of two Such incomparable perfons/'
O, Melville, what a Scene was this •
—here the dying Lailra had a fainting fit,—and we thought her gone for ever!—At length Slie once more, on hearing the name of Bellmour pronounced, opened her dying eyes and fixing them on me,—“ I die,”—Said She,—“ but I die contented, thus	I
happy in your Sight—your touch—	|
your tender pity.----Farewell:—a	|
long—a last farewell!—Give me your > hands.”—(she feebly took a hand of | each of us, who were both kneeling \ by, transfixed in Sorrow.)—‘‘ give me your hands.—Thus let me join them.
■—Heaven bleSs you—bleSs—you both.
■—(preshng a hand of each to her cold
lips.~
■
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	163
lips.^—Then, Softly exclaimed) Oh Bellmour, receive my latest breath !’*
It was, indeed, her last-fhe died
—died, that moment, in my arms, as I was endeavouring to raiSe her on the pillows.
For a few minutes we stood gazing on the pallid corSe.—a Sweet Smile still remaining,—How pregnant was the object before us of reflection !—But I cannot,—will not dwell on the melancholy Subject: my tears must flow— will ever flow for this unfortunate, this noble-minded woman. Heavens I what strength of mind did fhe exhibit, in braving the horrors of death for thy Bellmour!—and what must have been her filent pangs, to See the daily, the hourly preparations for my approaching marriage with another! This was evidently the caufe of her death.—My generous Patty is continually exclaiming, “ It was I—it was I—that killed the Lady Laura
You
164	-A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
You know me too well, my friciiel, not to fuppofe this mekmchojy affiiir has funk deep into my heart: indeed it has.—Why—why-—did She not discover herfelf years ago —But what would I Say ?
Every possible mark of honour and refpect I have paid to the poor cold reliques of the dear departed:—she was interred, as befitting her high rank and noble birth, in a vault I had ! purpofely made in my paisish-churcli h in the country ; and long—long will I her revered memory remain in my 1 “ heart of hearts)
Among many other moSh afSedting circumfianees,, it Seems, when the attendants were preparing this dear la-mented woman for the coshn, they found, tied round her body, cloSe as polsible to her heart, a very Small mi- { niature picture of thy Bellmour, Set round with diamonds, of immenSe value. The likenefs is amazing :—this	'
she
I
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	165
She mtiSi long have worn in Secret, as it is dated four years fiirce. >
You will not, after perusing this most melancholy story, wonder that we have a few days fufpended our nuptial ceremony : this Small rcfpect is Surely owing to the memory of the e-ver lamented Laura D’Aumarez.
But now, my Melville, for Subjects more agreeable.-—I depend on your promife of visiting East-wood park, that our nuptials may be celebrated on one and fame day. It is needlefs, I trust, to tell you, that my happinefs will be doubled, by the knowledge that your future felicity on earth, will be enfurcd to you by the poffesiion of all you hold most dear, as well as my own. Indeed we have both a profpect 'of permanent happinefs: we have not, lovely as arc our hrides-elcB.^ made their beauty the,foie attraction: where that alone is done, I have often ob-ferved Satiety Soon take place.—External
166	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
nal beauty alone, often creates a violent - paflion, and the enamoured man mistakes the violence of love for its duratiom he judges of the future, by that which pleaSes him now, without considering how far that which pleaSes to-day, may be disagreeable to-morrow.—We are, in Short, all of us too apt to depend on ourfelves, as if we were always the Same, and yet we are changing every day.—
I hope, however, my dear Charles, that you and I Shall prove the common-received maxim to be falfe; that we enjoy leSs what we obtain, than what we hope for, and that we are Seldom happy but in expeBation.”
Adieu !—I shall get the old chapel put in repair, on the approaching joyful occasion, with a new altar-piece', where you will receive the hand of i your lovely Fanny, on the fame day which will give my equally amiable maid to,
Your most sincere friend,
BELLMOUK,
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	167
‘LETTER XXVII.
LADY WILLIS TO LADY CHARLOTTE RICHLEY,
YPrtmrofe-Hdh
OU See this, my dear friend, dated from the Sweet villa of Mrs Douglas: a .neat little elegant iiouSe, adjoining almost my beloved hufband’s park, and of which he has given her the entire poffestion. He has alfo fettled two hundred pounds per annum on this very amiable, but unfortunate relation, to which my father and I add another hundred —So that her circumstances now, with many other advantages a» isifing from her being fettled So near us, are perfectly eaSy. Never was, Surely, Such humility—Such moderation, as our charming cousin poffestes, in her every word and action!—We have had the utmost difficulty to force
upon
r68	A LTSSON FOR LOVERS.
upon her the above mentioned benefits.—Tire meaneSt cottage, the dear woman Said, in our neighbourhood, would be quite Sufficient, or a little farm of twenty pounds a year. My Edward, all generous benevolence, would fain have put her in the entire poSTeffion of a handSome Seat of his, not many miles diStant, but this fhe absolutely rejected ; and, at length, we have got her to fix in this Sweetly-ru-ral habitation, called PnmroSe-Hill.
The fituation of jt is beautifully romantic, as it has every advantage in profpect, that hanging woods, rocks covered with the greenest: verdure, and a clear, but rapid river, can bestow. I The houSe, which conSists of only a f hall, a parlour and three chambers, is E furnifhed by the diredlion of its hum-	I
ble mistrefs, in the most simple, but	I
neat Style imaginable: instead of chi- ! ' na, she insists on plain delph-ware:	■
—and in lieu of chintz or damalk furniture,
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	169
Hiture, will have nothing more costly than a white cotton or Sprigged linen throughout the houSe. Her little houSehold Sne has limited to two maid-Servants, and one boy in livery. A Small meadow, adjoining her garclen, in which we have Sent her a cow, for the uScof her children, adds much to
I
the pictureSque Scene which Surrounds this most pleasing abode. It is, indeed, almost impervious to the eye of mortal man, being “ emboSomed,” as Milton calls it, in lofty trees. After having croffed the river by a bridge, overgrown with weeping willows, you Spy . ft meandering little path, through arocky kind of broken cliffs, which, after paS-sing a thick copSe, the abode of all the - -thrushes, nightingales, and blackbirds in the neighbourliood, you infensibly gain the little Summit of Primrofe-HilL The houfe, which is a white stucco, and neatly stated, is situated in the middle of a garden ; in which roles,
VOL. II.	H	jafmine,
lyO	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
jaSmilie, and honey-Suckles, are blooming in their higheSt beauty. From the garden, which, on one Side, adjoins a hanging rock, covered with wild thyme, and a variety of odoriferous Sweets, intermixed with the greened: ' herbage, we defcend by Some steps into a little wildernefs. Solitary beyond all description ; no Sound invading the ear, but the distant dashing of waterfalls, or natural caScadcs among the rocks. Save the moaning of the pining turtle-dove. A clear nvulet runs hrrrduling through this Small fairy Spot of inchantment, which still adds (with the addition of a rustic bench of twined osiers on its banks) to the beauty of the whole truly-fylvan Scene. My Edward is So charmed with this Solitary brook and its lowly bench, that he has written on the latter, “ O Sweet retreat!”—and on the humble wicket, which leads to this melancholy, but pleasing Spot, he has infcnbed,
Sacred
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	I? I
Sacred to peace and Solitude-,
“ Where midnight fays and fairies dance,
“ All hail! May no rude blast “ Invade thy Springing flowers,
“ Nor Spotted Snake lurk on thy banks;
Thy daSied banks, where roSes Ihed a couch,
No bird of night be heard,
“ Save Sweetest Philomel, who whilst “ She w'arbles her love-labour’d Song,
Her notes, in tears doth Jleep !*”
Our dear couSin has only been fettled in her beautiful retirement one ^ week : a very short time, indeed, was neceffary for fettling a perSon So easily Satisfied, and So perfetstly contented with the humblest comforts .of life.
I am Sorry to Say the Spints of this very amiable woman are Still low:—
Slill Seem oppreffed with the remembrance, as I fuppoSe, of her hushand’s perfidy.—Often do I See (though I Say Alothing) a silent tear steal down her languidccheek :—as often do I hear -
j - her check a rising sigh.
I	»
!	* Milton.
-Hz	Laft
t
172	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
Last night we walked in the lonely wilderncfs, which 1 have been attempting to defcisibe, by moon-light. As I was fondly leaning on the arm of my beloved Edward, he, in raptures with the enchanting Spot, exclaimed, —“ Surely nature intended this elyfi-um for the abode of happy lovers!
“ Aye,” faid Mrs. Douglas, tenderly sighing, “ for faith and conflancy like
yours—If my poor—unhappy”---------she
stopped.
Indeed, Sophia,” faid I, “ if you are thus melancholy, you must not walk in the wildernefs by moon-light.”
I would not here, my dearest Charlotte, be understood that our lovely cousin nourifies a grief which renders her infensible to the pleafures which our friendship has prepared for her ;— far from it:—she is, indeed, all gratitude all humble thankfulnefs:—and of your offered kindnefs too, my fweet friend, she is highly fensible :—but ‘
there
^	A LESSON FOR LOVERS. ■	I73
there is a Soft kind of melancholy a-bout her, in the midst of all her ft riving to be cheerful, which , makes me fear it may hurt her health.
“ Why is it,” she often exclaims, ‘‘ my dear lady Willis, that, in the midst of happinefs, the flghing heart will remmd one of imperfection
“ Ah, my friend,” I reply, “ the - Sighing heart of a tender woman, never can forget the firf object of its Sensibility and affection.”
Time, however, and the various little Scenes of varied life,, which must neceffarily occur, joined with our unremitting endeavours to amufe and en-tertain this fair mourner, will, I hope, calm all her griefs, and hush her for-^ rows into peace.
'	Wednefday evening.
Thus far I had written yesterday, the afternoon of wJiich was Spent So pleafantly, that I muSt endeavour to
H 3	give
^ \
174	A rESSON" FOR LOVERS,
give you an account of it.—Still at Sweet PisimroSeTIill.—As we were fitting yesterday, after dinner, the little Sophia and Louifii ran into the room, with their laps full of shells and flowers.
O mamma,” Said Sophia, her shining eyes testifying her joy, “ where ; do you think we have been.^—Look at thefe fine shells.”
“ And where did you get them?”
Said their fond mother.
‘‘ Why we have been up to the very top of the great high, white rock, at I tlie bottom of the wildernefs, with Mary, our maid, and there we Saw • the old man who lives—who lives in the cave, with a long white beard: he gave us thefe shells and stowers.”
“ The old man!”—we all exclaimed, an old man live in a cave in one of thoSe rocks at the bottom of the wildernefs ?—impollible 1”
"^I'wo
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	175
Two gentlemen who had dined with us, and a young lady in the neighbourhood, inStantly one and all Said, there was undoubtedly an old man resided in a cave there, who was called the hermit of the white rock.
-Mr. Dennis, one of the gentlemen, who is a learned clergyman, Said, “ This venerable man, I affure you, ladies, is a very extraordinary character :—he Supports' himSelf entirely from roots and the vegetables of the rock ; whilst his only drink is what a Small adjoining caScade, near his cave. Supplies him with. I,” continued Mr Dennis, “ who am fond of feeing novelties, with Some little difficulty, one day, afcended this rock, to get a sight of this wonderful hermit; and, in good truth, my trouble was fully compensated.—I found him, indeed, a man of extraordinary knowledge, great learning, and uncommon abilities. ’ He is almost., grown double with age, and.
H 4,	has
iy6 A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
has a IfHig silver beard, down to his girdle.—In this Solitude, he told me, he has lived near two years, wholly giving himSelf up to prayer, medita-tion, and abstinence.—As to abstinence, I Iliould indeed imagine he must, in his situation, be almost in a starving state ; and as to prayer and meditation, 1 really believe he praDiSes both ; if I may judge of his truly chnStian Sentiments, his resignation, and Submission to the will of heaven. Why a man of Such very extensive understanding fhould have Secluded himfelf from the world, in this manner, is a mystery I know not. I Should indeed have visited him again, but have been long abSent from this county.—You did not know,’’ continued Mr. Dennis, “ that you had a hermit fo near you, Mrs. Douglas, though his rock is that very one which •almost hangs over the little wildernefs in your gaiTleii.”
“ O
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	177
O Heavens!”- Said I, “ I ^7" ing to See this hermit.—I must fee him.—Did you never hear of him Sir Edward.^”
He replied, he thought he had Sometime since, but did not believe the story, till now, to be true, So thought no more about it.
Very few people,” replied Mr. Dennis, “ have heard oS this man :— and indeed his extreme privacy makfes it next to imposiible he Should be known, as he never quits his rock, which is entirely out of the road to any place whatever.”
“ I beg,” siiid I, we may make a party, and get a sight of this wonderful man.”
I'he young Lady, Mifs Mortimer, who was with us, desired to make one of the number, and my dear Edward was delighted with the Scheme.
H 5	“ I affure
I - A
lyS	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
•	“ I affure you, ladies,” fitid Mr. Den-
nis laughing, “ you will have Some difficulties to encounter”	•
“ Mary the nurfe-maid, was now called, as it Seemed, by the childrens account, that she had difeovered a Small winding path, up one part of the rock, more acceffible, than what lay on the other fide.—In Short, the evening being remarkably fine, we all, excepting poor Mrs. Douglas, who had a violent cold, and was fearful of increafing it, Sallied forth with Mary for our guide, and with Some trouble (what is it that perSeverance will not Surmount.^) we at last aScended the rock.
AVhilfi: we were on the road to it, Mifs MeSrtimer and I laughed heartily at the pofiibility of perhaps the hermit, after all our pains, being no more than Some beggar, or fun-burnt old gipfy in his cave, whom Mr. Dennis, as she Said, in his creatLoe fancy, had metamorphofed into a most extraordinary
LTSSON FOR LOVERS."	179’’
nary fine character of a hermit., forSooth, who had philofophically forSaken the world and all its vanities. “ Dennis,’^ added the agreeable lively girl, “ you Shall Suffer for this: for if I find your account not true., I will make you take the lover’s leap from yon tremendous jutting rock, into the lake beneath, as a punishment for our fatigue and your, credulity.”
“ If ladies,” Said he dryly, “ will have curtofity., why they must pay for it.”
But to proceed, with much laughter, and infinite pleaSantry, we at length Surmounted all our little difficulties.
A deep cave now prefented itSelf, overgrown with ivy, and holly:—on one fide of it was a Small garden of herbs > and roots:—but what attracted most of our attention was, the hermit him-Self, Seated on the stump of an old oak, at the very entrance of the cavern. On our approach, he very refpectfully
aroSe.
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
arofe. I never Saw a more venerable figure. His hair and long beard were white as silver,—his garment a coarfe black lort of looSe gown, tied round his waist with a cord, still added to his uncommon appearance.
Our gentlemen made a proper apology for intruding on his retirement, which the hermit anSwered with So much politenefs, and eaSe of manner, that convinced us he must have been acquainted, in better days, with genteel life, at'least.
He begged we would walk into his cave, the neatnefs of which I own Sur-pnSecl me. ^ At the farther end was a bed of strewed rushes ; in the middle of his habitation stood a Sort of table, or rather a large stool, which he had himSelf made out of the branches of trees,twined most ingeniousty together.
■—On my noticing it, “Necestity, Madam,” Said he, “ is the mother of invention.”—d'he roof of this cave he
had
/
A LESSON FOR LOVERS,	l8l
had So polished, that it had even the Smooth appearance of a beautiful marble. There were Several Seats, Scooped from the sides of the rock, covered with green moSs. In short, we were delighted with all we Saw. On our expresiing an astonishment at his choosing So abSo-lute a foUtttde.,—“ It is,’’ Said he sighing, “ for that very reaSon that \do cht^Se it. —My Sorrows are great, and many; and in this Sequestered Spot I chooSe to bury them in oblivion.—\ have known the world;—I have known astluence; —and this I know, that one hour’s con-' verSe with my God, in this quiet retreat from all its vanities and follies, is much more than adequate for what this Seclusion can instict, and much more than an equivalent for any thing the ' world can bestow.”
\Ve were charmed with his Sentiments. Sir Edward and the gentlemen Soon entered into a diScourfe on natural philoSophy; the henliit having produced
i82 a lesson for lovers. duced an infinite number of petrifactions, curious fofiils, and other beautiful productions of nature he had found among the rocks.—On thefe Subjects he displayed great knowledge—and indeed on every other.
I expreffed my furpisife how he could postibly have Supported himfelf in that absolute Solitude So long, on merely roots and water.
“ Little, Madam, very little,” he replied, with a fort of resigned Smile, “ is needful for the Support of nature.—I have cultivated a Small Spot, adjoining my cave, for roots in the winter months, and in thofe of the Summer, bountiful nature abundantly Supplies me, even with luxuries.—Every busii affords me berries;—and I find a kind of wild flraw-bernes among the green verdure of the rocks, wonderfully refresiiing. I have a stint and Steel with which I strike a sire.—Alas!” continued the good old man, when imaginary wants are annihilated,
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	183
lated, how few—how very few things are, in reality, requisite for our Sup-port!”
“ Your doctrine, Sir, “ Said Sir Ed-v/ard, “ would be but little relished, or indeed understood, by the generality of the world—at least by an age like the preSent, devoted as it is to the most shameful luxury.”
“ Are you not afraid,” Said Mifs Mortimer, “ of being molested by strangers in So Solitary a retreat?”
“ I have Seen no human being,” replied the hermit, “ Save that worthy gentleman once before (pointingto Mr. Dennis), and two lovely little children, who this day called here with their attendant.—I have a few books, and this divine one in particular,” continued he, taking up a bible, “ which Supports my Spirits.—I am not alone:—I trust, my God is ever—ever prefent with me.—I have known—but I cannot proceed—remembrance stops my tongue.”.
Now,
2 34	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
Now, thought I, would I give the world to hear this old man’s hiftory.—^ Some very particular events, Surely, must have occasioned him thus to fly Society and the allurements of the world. The elegance of Ids language, and his Sentiments on every Subject, So uncommon in a perSon of his appearance, raifed my curiosity to the very highest pitch-•—Whether he obServed this" propensity in me, I know not, but he continued : —“ My Sorrows are too bitter to bear repetition—they are (prefling his hand to his heart, and sighing bitterly) de:p-ly imprinted here\^—but they are too great for ittteraticeS''
After this declaration, you know, my friend, we could not, in common good manners, desire a diScloSure of his afflictions.
“ 1 wifli,” Said this amiable old man’, “ I could refresh you ladies, after your troubleSorne walk to my poor abode, with tea, or coffee;—but theSe are what
I am
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	185
I am wiiolly destitute of:—but permit me to offer part of my little store, of fncli refreshments as my rock—my cave affords.” Saying thus, he retired to the inner part of his dwelling, and quickly returned with a paper of wild wood-strawbernes, fome hurtle-bensies, and nuts of the last year’s produce.
“ Excufe,” faid he, “ ladies, the Simple fare of a poor old hermit.”
“ Nay,” laid I fmiling, you treat us even with delicacies.”
The good man would alfo prefent us with many natural cuisiofities of fof-stlls, pebbles, and petrified moffes, wonderfully beautiful, and with which I intend to decorate fome of my most elegant Indian cabinets.
We now began to think of departing, as the evening drew on apace. My Edward, and Mr. Dennis, both preffed	'
the obliging hermit to leave his Solitude for a day or two at least, and give them the pleafure of his company.—
“ We
186	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
“ We have books,” Said they, “ and you,Sir, Shall be as retired asyoupleafe —But he begged to be excuSed, as he never more intended going into the
DJorld again:-----but Said, he Should-
eSteem it a parlicular favour, if we would honour him with another visit.
“ I do not,” Said the good man, “ quit the world becauSe I disiike Society,but becaufe 1 wmuld, in this ScqueStered a-bode, have more leiSure to bellow in my preparation for a future state, which I hope Soon to experience, and becauSe I wiSh to breathe my last on yonder rushy bed.—But where,” Said he, fee^ ing our attendant Mary, who had before stood wsithout the cave; “ where, young woman, are thofe Sweet little ones you had with you this morning.?
I hope no accident happened on their defcent from the rock.—Sweet babes !
how did their innocent prattle delight me !—Pray let me fee them once more.—Do they live near this place.”
“ Only,”
A LESSOlSr FOR LOVERS.	187
“ Only,” Said I, “ at the very foot of your formidable rock: they are your nearest neighbours. I will Soon—very Soon come again, and bring thoSe little prattlers with me.”
We now took our leave of the hermit, who attended us to the Summit of his rock, from whence we proceeded the way we had came, and arrived Soon after, the distance being not more than half a mile,'at Primrofe-Iiill, where we found our amiable cousin playing with her two Sweet children.
“ O, Mrs. Douglas,” Said I, “ we are enchanted with this hermit—never did I See So charmingv an old man ! you must—you Shall accompany us the next time we pay him'a visit.”
W e now fat down to a most cheerful Supper, and talked of nothing but the her-mit:—indeed it was a matter of astonishment to us all how a man, apparently accustomed to very genteel life, colild have existed, for above two years, destitute
l88	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
titute of almost the common Supports of nature,—without a fnencl,—without one ncccst’ary comfort.
“ How old is he Said Mrs. Don-glas.
“ Full fourfeore, I dareSiiy,” replied I; “ but you will be charmed with him notwithstanding.”
We Spent a most agreeable evening in chatting about this old man.—My dear huSband fays, he will fend a man on the morrow to clear the path, which leads to the cave, of Some impediments,
So that Qur journey, in future, will be . . more agreeable and ealy.
I have a most wonderful curiosity to know a little of the hermit’s history:
—and hope he will Soon favour me with it.
Mifs Mortimer has a brother, wiio, next week, is to Set out for Ireland.
'I'o him, therefore, shall I entruSt this voluminous packet, and he, as Soon as poisible, promifes to deliver it into
your
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	189
your ladyship’s fair hands.—I am jufi: now interrupted—but hope Soon to be able to finish my epistle adieu, therefore, for the preSent.
A ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ *
Fen at flight.
WHAT uncertain wretches theSe 7ucn are !—But,	^
u When a lady’s in the cafe, ^
All other things muss; then glve*5,9lace.”
Thus truly does the poet pronounce.
This provoking brother of Alifs Alor-timer, Sets out early to-morrow, it Seems, for Ireland, by which means I am obliged to Supprefs a thoufand things I had to Say to my beloved friend, the ffl er of my heart.
T'he very agreeable man, who bears this epistle to your fiiir hands, is on a matnmonial Scheme', I find, to Some Irish Lady of great fortune and beauty.
Your congratulatory letter, my Sweet Charlotte, I have carefully locked up, as I have a certain Scheme in my head, relative to the e^ithilamium I intend to -t
Send
190	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
fend you, on the fame occasion, very Shortly.—Suppofe I fteal the Sentiments of your charming letter, and put them into rhyme ?—It Shall be fo.—At pre-Sent, I have a quarrel both against Cupid and Hymen:—the latter, for protracting thus long your marriage :•—the former, that he does not lend his wings to your tardy Colonel.—HaSten your next letter-d—and I beSeech you tell me when you visit England, and if your nuptial day is approaching,—Believe me, most faithfully, Your
LUCY WILLIS.
P. S. I will write again very Soon.
■■ ■ ■ —
LETTER XXVIIL
THE SAME, TO THE SAME.
O-	Primrofe-Hllf Monday noon,
MY dear Charlotte, I have a wonderful event to relate.—You will hardly believe that—but I will not anticipate.
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	I9I
pate. To lead to this interesting matter, I must tell you the following particulars.
About a week Since the day being fine, and my fnend, Mrs. Douglas, recovered from her late indiSpoSition;
I propoSed a Second visit to the hermit on the white rock. Accordingly a party of six, with the little Sophia and LouiSa, Set out for the cave, the path of it being now made very tolerable.
After a Sweet walk, in-which we had frec[uently stopped to behold the amazing beauties which vangated nature has fo profufely Scattered around; we at length gained the Summit of the rock, where, at the entrance of his cave, on a bank of mofs, fat the hermit reading. He arofe with much politenefs, and welcomed ns to his Solitary retreat: but how great was my astonifhment, when on fixing his eyes on Mrs. Douglas, he started back with amazing perturbation, and with a deep groan fell ■
fenSeleSs
1^2	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
ScnSeleSs at her feet!—Imagine our Surprize.—We stew to help him; but the ' children, who were just before us, had now stung themfelves down by him, crying out—“ Oh the poor hermit!— the poor hermit!”
Wdiether in his falling, or occasioned by their buSy little hands, as well as ours, who tned to give him air, by throwing off his hat, 1 know not; but, in the confusion, all together, off drop-ed a very long, white, silver beard from the chin of our hermit; and alfo, as| long and venerable a falSe head of grey hair, which diScovered our imaginary old T 7nan to be a very handSome young fellow, about twenty-five years of age :
" and though he appeared emaciated ;— and though his eyes v/ere now clofed, for he was in a strong fainting fit, I think I never Saw a finer countenance.
We were alliin the utmost astonishment at this wonderful metamorphosis, as you may well fuppoSe, when instantly
H
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	I93
tRiidy, on Mrs. Douglas approaching him to give her astistance with the rest of us, She Suddenly Shrieked out, “ O my hufband 1^—my hufband!—he is, he is my hufband !”—and down^She fell, alSo, without Seeming life, or motion,— What a Scene of confusion Was here!— My Edward ran for water, to the next • cafcade Dennis (who was with us) was endeavouring to raiSe my Sweet cousin from the ground :—the children were Screaming,'—O my mamma “ is dead 1—and the poor hermit is dead !”-—I was applying my bottle of -Salts, and chaffing the temples of each' of the fainting objects.*—At length, after they had both been very plentifully Spnnkled with water, they began to Sh.ew Some signs of returning life. I Seated Mrs. Douglas (who now just began to open her fair eyes) on a bank of wild chamomile, whilst my hufbanjd was busily employed in his cares for Douglas;—for Douglas he proved to
I	be.
1'94	^ BESSON TOR LOVERSv
be. He was the firSL wdiofe SenScs.now returned :—when most pathetically he , exclaimed, ‘‘ O hide me—hide me from that dear^that injured excellence 1-— Gracious Heaven, do I live to fee her j once agalii!’—O let me,” added he, ; throwing IsimSelf on the ground, ‘‘ here j let me die -breathe out my Soul in | imploniig the forgiveneS^ of that in- j jured angel.-—O my Sophia (endeavour- ? ing to crawl towards her) in me be-hold your wretched hufband :*—the once | vile Douglas ! but long^—long since a | convert to thy virtues.”—He wept a-loud.	'
Imagine what we, the by-Standers, i, felt at a Scene So entirely affecting;— for it is not in the,power of language ! to do it justice.	|
Whilst the poor penitent Douglas ’ looked ?^/ to his angelic wife,as to Some | heavenly being of a Superior order, she ; Snatched a look at him of mingled a- j stonishment, and, I thought, of inex- |
presiible
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	195
preffible tendernefs :—it was, however, not unattended with a certain air of diSpleaSure, which Such wi*ongs as She had received from this huSband might well justify.
He now took the little Sophia and LouiSa in his arms, and kifiing them with unspeakable tendernefs (for it could not be here doubted, but that he knew they were his own, not only from the powei'ful tye of nature, but-from my having called them by their names) he wept over them with the most tender exprefiions of fondnefs; and kneeling between each of thefe lovely babes, “ Come, my little Sophy,’*
Said he, “ come, my pretty LouiSa, conduct me to thy much-loved parent:
«—there kneel with me, and implore her forgivenefs for thy most wretched father.”	’	-
He was now at the feet of his beauteous wife; when, “ O Sophia,” he faid, in accents the most moving, “let thefe Sweet innocents plead for me:—r-I 2	in
196	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
in them behold your once-loved Douglas.”—He funk almost proSti^te at her knees, the children kneeling—my Sweet friend could not bear this, indeed it was Soul harrowing.
“ Douglas—my Douglas,” Said she, in a low, but trembling accent, “ why why did youdeceive me ?—why didyoii leave me—leave your poor Sophia to Struggle with miSery ?—to lament thy cruel abfence ?—All—all elfe I could have borne ^but”—Her tears here choaked her utterance.
Do you think, my Charlotte, I did not weep at this truly moving Scene ? —^Indeed I did, my Edward too, and the worthy Mr. Dennis, gave the strongest proofs of their SenSibility : in short, there was not a dry eye among us. The most angelic of women (for So I really look on Mrs. Douglas to be) —at length continued :
“ Why, my o^tce dear hushand, did you leave me in the dreadful reflection that you loved another woman?—It
was
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	197
was there”—A stood of tears prevented farther utterance.
“'^Oh name her not,” he cried;— “ detestable, abominable woman—as She is.—Oh 1 I could a tale unfold, which would convinc_e my Sweet love, that, culpable as I am,—I was not the wretch that firji Seduced.—O She was vile !”
He stopped;—and whilst his very Soul Seemed torn with the consticling passions of love, stiame, grief, and de-fpair, his little Sophia did more for him in one moment, than all his rhetoric could have done; fo wonderful. So powerful a pleader is nature in the Sweet Simplicity of a child.
“ O mamma,” faidfhe, will you not look once on the poor hermit —fee his tears :—fee his agonies :—what has he done to offend?—I love him—don’t you. Sister LouiSa ? pray look upon him. —Nay, mamma, you Shall give him once your hand.”
I 3	‘‘ Ah !
19^	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
‘‘ All! my Sw^eet child,” Said her mother, bending forward, “ thy ardeSs pleadings melt my Soul!”
Douglas observing a ray of kindnefs beaming in her eye, aroSe and caught her in his arms.
“ My heavenly angel,” he, exclaim* ed, “ forgive thy Douglas, and accept his penitence!—Oh, do not drive him to deSpair !”
In Short, Charlotte, for I must be brief, the whole of what was Said on this affecting occalion by each of them, is impoffible for me to defcribe,—-It consisted of every thing that was tender,—moving,—and affecting, to the utmost degree. Whilst tears, and sighs of trahfport were alternately blended, ——the repentent hufband held his giving angel to his breast in an agony of joy whilst She (Such is the force of nature, where Love., as in her gentle bofom, for this hery?r/?, and only object of affection, had never been obliterated)
with
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	I99
with chastened rapture dwelt on his every word.—But the pen of ^Richard-fort—of a RoufJe.au—could only do justice to 2. reconciliation of fo deeply-interesting a nature, as that of fo tender, and affectionate an union, as we were witnefs to^.
After a thoiifand tender intreaties for forgivenefs, on the part of Douglas;
* Some readers, who are not deeply (killed in the knowledae of the human heart, or fome starched prudes may here exclaim, “ It was strange, me-thinks, that Mrs. Douglas, after the wrongs &e had received from her bafehilband, wmuld evenfo much as deign to look on him, much more to be reconciled :—fuch a wretch Should have kneeled, and in-treated for an age, before he Ihonld have met with the least hope of forgiveneft.”—B	alking pardon,
for di/Senting in opinion from the'e critics, I must beg leave to fay, that Heaven itfelf., (that feat of purity and mercy) we are taught to believe, Will be appeafed by -penitence : will look with an eye of compaffion on a contrite heart, which owns with deepest forrow its offences :—we ought not then to fuppofe, that a tender wife, who still loved, would be more obdurate than even offended Heaven itfelst
I 4	again
200	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
again weeping over his new-found children, Sec. it growing now the middle of /	the day, (for we had taken our walk
just after breakfast) my Edward, wUling to nvike the day—the joyous day as agreeable as poffible to us, as it was interesting to the parties concerned, Sent two of our Servants, unknown to us ladies, to our own Seat, for a cold collation, wines, fweetme'ats, and fruits of all kinds.—Imagine, therefore, our wonder, when being Seated in the cave, w^e were Summoned to a most elegant dinner, which was Spread under Some very high, and beautiful ash trees, at a little distance behind the caVern :—the day being excessively Sultry, made the situation, which my dear hufband had thus y?jySy chofen, more delightful:—in short, we Sat down on craggy stones, covered with thick grey moSs, with which' this rock abounds, a Set of the most real, happy beings, 'that perhaps this wurld affords. Douglas, and his So-
phia,
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.-	201
phia, however ate but little ; a tear I observed of mingled shame and joy often Healing down the cheek of the former, and a tender figh, as often efcap-ing the gentle bofom of the latter. To add to our delightful entertainment, for So I must call it, we were on a Sudden charmed with a band of music:—horns, clarinets, and hautboys being placed in \ different parts of the wood, anfwering each other, and which were rendered still more charming, from the fine echo among the rocks. This too, you will readily fuppofe, was my beloved Edward’s contrivance : the band being;
^	O -
that we’ always keep in our houfe.
“ This,” Said the Sweetly—Smiling Mrs. Douglas, “ is too—too much !”— adding in a low whifper; “ Was I ever unhappy. Lady Willis.?—Ought I to complain—Surely, the felicity I now enjoy. Seems more than a counterbalance for all my Sufferings'!”
I 5 i	I pafs
2.0Z	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
I pafs over, iny dear Charlotte, the manner—the lively gratitude, which animated every feature of my amiable cousin, when sire introduced my Edward and me, by the title (as She was pleaSed to call us) of the Prefervers of hers, and her childrens lives, and from the horrors of absolute want and mifery.—• Douglas, on hearing this, would have stung himSelf at our feet.
/	“ O my wife!—my children ! (ex-
claimed he moSt pathetically) here let us kneel, and pour forth our thanks for Such exalted goodneSs !”—In truth, we had enough to do to calm his tranSports on this head.
“We,” Said my beloved hiifband, “ have done nothing:—nothing, but what the most common humanity required.—-W^hat mighty ment can there be in barely doing one’s duty?^—It has. pleafed Heaven to blefs my Lucy and me wsith astluence ; and it would be criminal, in my opinion, if we did not
only
A LESSON -FOR LOVERS.	203
only afford relief to Suffering merit that may fall in our way, but alSo Seek out for objects of distreffed worth, to comfort and assist them.-—Fortune’s gifts are merely adventitious:—I look on -mySelf as only theJlevjtirci, of the large poffdlions it has pleafed the Author of all goodneSs to bestow on me.” -
All this time, poor Douglas was holding one hand on his breaSt, which Seemed almost convulSed, with his face covered with the other.—At length, he burst into a flood of tears, more expref-fve than all the language in the world.
In the courSe of the day, we gathered from this real penitent.f for Such he truly is, a few heads of his story, relative to his life abroad, and the reafons which influenced him to bury himSelf in Solitude.—A few particulars only we we gathered ;—for it could not be Sup-poSed, that, agitated as he was, from Such a contranety of passions which he then experienced, he could fit down
calmly
^^4	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
calmly to tell a long story, or a cold^ te-clious narrative.
All we gathered frojii our late Hermit was, that lie was not the feducer of the wretched Mifs Summers, though he confefTed, with the deepest Shame and contrition, that she had given him rea-fon to believe she was pregnant by him: -^that, in conSequence of this, and her perpetually intreating him to sty with her to Some distant country, to conceal her growing infamy, of which she then had the art to make him believe he was the Sole author, he took the fatal step of quitting England :—that the partner of his shameful flight,.Soon afterwards, fell into every exceSs of levity—and, to his utter astonishment, at the end , offeven months., was delivered of a live full-grown child ; of which, she acknowledged, on his reproaching her with a prior engagement, that she was pregnant two months before she came to tlidr houSe in London -that she
confeffed
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	205
confeffed alSo, that her mother’s footman was the father; and that, to conceal this matter from her eye, fhe had deSired a journey to town ;—which her fond, unSuSpecting parent, easily granted.-----She had then,” added Mr.
Douglas, “ nothing to do, but to find out Some man, to whom she might make Such advances, as should make it almost impolsible for him to eScape her Snare. -----1, alas ! confeSs, with the deepest Sorrow, that wretched man was my-SelS!—It was I who was her dupe !— It was I who was infatuated,—enfnared by her arts !—But I will not,—cannot dwell on the shocking particulars:
.	—Suffice it to Say, that. Soon after the
birth of the above mentioned child, she fled to Vienna with a German
i
Count, or rather Some gambler^ who had taken upon him that title ;—and, I thank heaven, I have^ heard no more of her.”
“ And
I
2o6 a lesson for lovers.
“ And where,’’ Said our Sweet con-fill, the pattern of all female tenderneSs, “ where is the poor infant all this time ? what niiSery must Such a helpleSs little unfortunate being be expoSed to !
“ A few days only,” replied her hufband, “ after its birth, terminated a life, which, in all probability, would have been wretched.”
He then proceeded to Say, as he had been long Seized with the most poignant remorSe for his abominable conduct to the most deServing and amiable woman in the world, he could neither rest night or day without instantly returning to England :—being determined to throw himSelf at her feet;—to intreat her forgiveneSs of his attrocious errors ;—and, by the strictest adherence to morality and virtue, merit her attention.
“ To England, therefore, I came,” added he. “ Alas ! I considered not, my Sweet love had, most probably,
from
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	lOJ
fi*om my fliameful flight, been under the cruel necessity of Seeking a more humble dwelling!—^On my arrival in London, I repaired to our former lodging, my Sophia, but, alas 1 was informed you had left it near a twelve-month before ; and could get not the least information to where you had fled with the dear, fatherleSs, little ones.—Almost distracted, I traverSed, in an agony of grief and defpair, almost England over, in Search of my Sophia :—alas ! in vain—not the least trace—or probability could I ever find, of what my foul So ardently panted to recover.-—And now in defpair, joined with deep—deep repentance, for my infidelity—my crime in abandoning the loveliest of women, (no other crime, thank heaven, I know) I fought for comfort in my God.—At length, religion., with its angels aid, pointed out the only road to peace. That God, ever willing to receive the penitent invoker,
208	A LESSON FOR LOVER
voker, in his mercy, directed me to this moSt Solitary Spot:—where, I trust,
I have, by the strictest life of prayer and mortification, in Some Small degree, wastied away the guilt of my offence. My crime, I confeSs, was great, but I Solemnly aver, that never before, nor since my connection with that artful woman, have I ever Swerved, even in thought, from my incomparable— my dearest, only love.—My hours, in this Sweet Solitude, for to me it never appeared dreary, have been dedicated wholly to my God :—Save thoSe I. Spent in prayer, for .my adored ,wife and lovely babes.—Alas I little could I have imagined that all I held dear in this world, was within So Small a dir stance from my retreat!—I will convince you, by my Suture conduct, my much-loved wife, that, where the heart is not wholly corrupted., it may, by the divine aliiStance, be again a convert to virtue.”
Here,
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	209
Here, casting a look of inexpressible . tenderneSs, mingled with a kind of ingenuous shame, the penitent Douglas ceafed Speaking.
Towards the evening of this delicious day, we all eScorted the hermit from / his cavern,down to the wildernefsat the bottom of the rock, that Sweetest of all Spots, which I have, in a former letter, endeavoured to deScribe. Here, whilst we were drinking our tea, in this most beautiful retreat, our horns and clarinets were playing in an adjacent wood, which hung over the water, from an impending rock ;—whilst Some Soft flutes and hautboys were diSpoSed So happily in various parts of this little paradife, that the whole was altogether ravishing. I was charmed with every part of the behaviour of our new-found hushand:—he was tender,—yet diffident ;—delicately attentive to his Sophia’s every word and motion :—and, whilst his little ones hung on his neck,
he
210	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
he was alternately bestowing his carest Ses on each, and hugging them to his boSom.
We remained in this most beautiful retreat, the wilderneSs, till now the full moon rising, as Milton phraSes it, “ in clouded majeSty,” exhibited the most glorious sight in nature :—when the whole happy group retired, for the night, to PnmroSe-IlilL
Several days have pasted since this most agreeable diScovery.—The more we fee, the more we admire Douglas: and, if ever there was a [meere penitent., he is one. My opinion of him is, that, like many other young men, whoSe hearts are yet good, he postested, before his bad conduct, great animal fpiisits, high health, a stow of mirth, and much good nature, Til which made him a most agreeable companion ; but I cannot brag of his oeconomy.—It was his reduced finances, owing to his want QIfoHdity, which, as he has now contested
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	£II
feSTed to his amiable wife, was the foie caufe of that gloom she obServed in him, previous to the arrival of Mifs Summers. Agreeable as Mr. Douglas was, in the days of his flbtfy Feit and vivcbci-tj., I would, however, not recommend a man of that character for a hujband* I am not very fond of your men of 'wit alone: Some admired lines of-Mj:. Pope, in his Effay on CriticiSm, croud into my head just now:—-they are theSe.
Unhappy wit, like most mistaken things,
“ Atones hot for that envy which it brings.
In youth, alone, its empty praife we boast 5 “ But foon the Ihort-liv’d vanity is lost.
“ Like Some fair flow’r the early Spring stippHcs, “ That gaily blooms, but e’en in blooming dies.
What is this w/r, which most our cares employ ? “ The owner’s wife which other men enjoy.
“ Still most our trouble, when the most admir’d, “ The more we give, the more is still requir’d,
“ ’Tis what the vicious fear, the virtuous Ihun,
' ' By fools ’tis hated, and by knaves undone.”
Douglas
212	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
Douglas is certainly a hotter man for his afsii(B:ions.—I am of opinion that the School of adversity is the best in the world, to teach us virtue :—his staShy u'/r, which, as Hamlet fays,
“ Us’d to fet the table in a roar^’	^
is now ripened into Solid zvifdmn. He now knows the real value of //me, and of money ;—two things of much more real utility to us than are too often imagined: my life for it, he wdil be good for the future. He often exclaims, with the divine pfalmist, “ It is “ good for me that I have been in “ troubley that I might learn God’s sta-“ tutes.”
Mrs. Douglas has just been telling me how much she was mistaken in th© character of Mifs Summers.
“ Could I have imagined,” she Said,
‘‘ that a girl bred in the country, and apparently not acquainted with the follies of the town, should ever have turned out thus ?—Indeed I had remarked
a boldnefs
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	21 3
fi hoJdnefs in her manner;—but then there w^as a ftmplicity about her, which made me look on all the freedoms, in the romping airs She gave her-	^
Self with my huSband, with a very favourable eye.'’
‘‘ Ah ! my dear Sophia,” Said I,
“ you was greatly deceived in this your former companion:—there is often much deception carried on under the simple guife OH country girl. Artief r innocence is what they often aJfeSt; but, in fact,
I have Seen the deepest cunnhig hid under the malk;—and many a man of merit and Senfe, has been drawn into a marriage with one of theSe ardlefs hoydens. Thefe country romps make nothing of throwing their arms round the neck of a pretty fellow, with whom they are striving in a game of innocent play, as it is called, or of unbuttoning his waistcoat, or even tearing it from his body;—in short, of taking many liberties, I must fay, that a town-bred
girl
a 14	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
girl would bluSh to think of. Alas I there is now no Such thing as rural Sim' plicity to be met with; whatever there might be in the days of good Queen Elizabeth. Every village now abounds with as many country coquettes, as any parish in the city of London or Weft-minster.”
I cannot wonder that my fair friend, in her early days at the Abbey, was struck with the very fine figure of Douglas. I affure you, my dear, har- | raffed as he has been by cares, and worn with abstinence in his hermit-' state, he is the very handSomest man, even now, 1 ever Set my eyes on,—-your fiiTiC Melville, and ?ny Edward excepted.
VSe See, my Snend, in the once gay Douglas, what a sincere repentance— what a deep contrition will do, with the asiiStance of heaven, towards making a sincere convert to virtue, Tshe fcheme the worthy penitent now
means
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	21 ^
means to purfue is to go into orders: (for which it Seems when at Oxford hd was intended:) my hufband has pro-mifed him the valuable rectory, in onr neighbourhood, of WeStbury, on the immediate death of the preSent old incumbent : So here, my dear, this worthy little family will be enabled to live very comfortably; the living being near five hundred pounds per annum.
You may perhaps wonder, as I did, ' that when we first visited the hermit in his cave, he fhould not recollect the. perfon of Sir Edward Willis; as I mentioned to you in one of my former letters. Some time since, that he had Seen Douglas at Oxford; but, in fact, it was merely et^pajfant that he had Seen him,-they having never been intimately acc[uainted : and it was, you will believe, impolFible for Sir Edward to discover Douglas, had hebeenindeedmore known to him than he was, under that enormous length of grey hair, which
- almoSt
1l6	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
almost covered his face, and with a beard, which hung down to his middle.
It is utterly impofiible to exprefe , our prefent felicity.—Our lovely cousin begins to recover her Spirits and beauty ; both which must have been greatly impaired by the constant Sorrows She has expenenced for theSe last five years of her life.—She is even lively enough to tell our hermit, that She shall btznijh him to his cave on the white rock, if she ever catches him tripping again.
P Ah Said he in return, looking with unSpeakable fondneSs, “ I will trtift you for thatmay I not, Lady Willis ?”
I leave you to guefs our prefent hap-pineSs :—but no, my friend, your faini ideas and fuppofitions I fear cannot do it justice :—to .know it perfectly, jou must become one of the number of us ^ happy wives, and confeSs with us, that no felicity on earth can equal that of
being
A LESSON FOR LOVERS,	217
being united to thoSe we love. That you may, my dearest Charlotte, Soon, very Soon, return to England, and make ' the happy experiment, is most sincerely wished by,
your very faithful,
and unalterable friend,
LUCY WILLIS.	,
ter During the late period, in which the preceding letters were written from Lady Willis to her fair friend, feveral epistles had likewife paSL ed between Sir Henry Bellmour and Colonel Melville, relative to the approaching nuptials of both.—In conSe-tpence of a most preSsing invitation from the former to the latter, to celebrate his happy day with the amiable MiSs Sidney, at the fame time, that he Should likewise give his own hand to the mistrefs of his affections, Colonel Melville, with his lovely bride and Mrs. Nelfon, were preparing to fet K	out
2i8	a lesson for lovers.
out on their journey to Sir Henry’s-' delightful Seat, at Eaflwood-Park.
MiSs Millwood, who had always pro-miSed her Sair fnend, Mifs Patty Rivers, to attend her as a bisidemaid, was now with her at that hoSpitable mansion, from whence that worthy young lady wrote the following letter, which the editor preSents to the candid reader.
\
LETTER XXIX.
.MISS MILLWOOD, TO MRS. MILLWOOD,
Fa/Iwood-ParkfjSrft. 5.
Mj dear Madam,	^
rr^
J[ HE most joyous party, perhaps this world affords, in which I include Colonel Melville, MiSs Sidney, and good Mrs. Nelfon, who all arnved here a few clays since, are at length affem-bled in this delightful feat; which,
with
,
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	219
with its Surrounding groves, Shady woods, and Soft Scenes of rural peace, Seems to be peculiarly adapted for the residence of thofe fond lovers who HOW inhabit it ; and who, tomiorrow, are to receive the hands of the two iiioSi: lovely women in the world, at the altar of the chapel of this ancient mansion ; which chapel has been just now repaired and beautified, purpoSely for this very happy occasion.
You will hardly think, perhaps, • want any thing to compleat our present felicity.—One happinefs, however, is Still not in our power to obtain :—it is, my dearest Madam, your prefence on this joyful event:—how very—very untoward, were the fates, that rendered it impoffible for you (by the arrival of my uncle) to make one of this happy circle !—^You desired me, in this vexatious abfence, to be as ,particular' as posiible ;—I hope it is K 2	needleSs
I
2 20	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	I
needleSs to Say, that to obey you, is the'	I
greatest pleaSure of my life.	I
’^I heSe weddings are to be celebrated I with all the magnificence imaginable ; for the gentry are invited for many miles round, to a most elegant Supper and maSquerade in the gardens, which are remarkably variegated with wood and walks uncommonly delightful; and which are to be lighted up with an infinite number of lamps, beautifully diversified. The poor, too, are in general,
.of Several parishes contiguous to East-wood-park, to partake of the pleafures ! which are preparing for them on this joyous occasion : fome large tents are already fixed for their reception in the park,, where they are to be regaled with a profusion of good cheer. An ox is to be roasted whole; and the young men and maidens are to dance to the found of the pipe and tabor on the green lawn before the houfe.
Fanny
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	221
Fanny Sidney is, if possible, more lovely than ever :—she has confelTed to me, that her late declining state of health was entirely owing to her daring (her own humble phraSe) to lift her eyes (though without a preSumptuous hope) to Colonel Melville.
“ Ah V’ Said the Sweet girl, “ I believe I should have died if”—
“ If what ?” Said the above-mentioned most amiable man, who that moment entered the room.
A tender dialogue now took place between them (for they regard mj fre--fence not one Single straw)—and which can be better imagined than exprejfed.
What an honour will Such a couple be to matrimony: and what a blesh'ng will they be to all around them!
But here I am interrupted by my Fanny, and Patty both, who desire my opinion of Some very nch and elegant bridal favours.—Adieu then, dear Madam, for the preSent i’—to-morrow, K 3	—happy
222	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
—happy day! I Shall be Scnbbling to you, as often as I can get from the joyous company.	^
duff day ??iornirg, den d do ch.
FOR three minutes am I Stolen up to my clofet to tell my dear mamma, that at nine, this morning, the happy nuptials were celebrated in the chapel: —the brides both behaved better than I had imagined they would.—/, to Say the truth, was very fooliSli; for I could not help dropping tears (I know not why) wliilSi: the awful ceremony was performing.
Lady Bellmour, and Mrs. Melville, (transportingnames!) were habited exactly the Same—in white luftnng gowns and petticoats, embroidered with nch Silver Sprigs, which, in the pattern of the Silk, were beautifully intermixt with large bunches of roSebuds. Their fine hair was ornamented with abnlliant diamond comb ; and Sprigs, of the utmost
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	223
most elegance, in jewels besides. We bride-maids, for there were four of us, were all in genteel new fancy-drelTes, all ^ habited alike.
Sir Henry and his incomparable Snend, Seem above the order of human beings :—you will easily fuppoSe what muSt their figure be (apparently the two handSomest men in England) when adorned in a taste the most rich and elegant that can be imagined: I think, however, I must give the preference to Melville his eyes Seem animated with uncommon lustre, and the transport, with which his foul is entirely poffeffed. Seems to brighten every feature of his manly countenance.
Six little girls (all children of ten years, cloathed in green) with chaplets of rofes, preceded our procefiion from the houfe to the chapel; each with a bashet on her arm, strewing the path with flowers.—On our return, a band of music Saluted us in the great hall; whilst horns and clarinets w^ere differently dif-K 4	^ pofed
224	^ LESSON FOR LOVERS.
poSed, in vanons parts of the woods, which almost Surround the houSe. Immediately on our arnval in the drawing-room, w^e fat down to a very elegant breakfast, in a stow of Spirits, not easily to be conceived.
Wte had just finished this repast, when a meffenger arrived with a letter for Colonel Adelville.—^No bad news, however, I fancy.—He took it, and retired to the window.—He then put it in his pocket, and fixing his eyes for the Space of a minute, on the carpet, —he Said to his lovely bride, in a Soft tone, “ My Fanny, I am going into the library Sor a few moments.’'—He instantly retired ;—and I left the room " at the fame time, to write thus far to my dearest mother.
We all dine (I mean our preSent
party, for the neighbouring gentry are not to aSfemble till towards evening)—» in a fiiperb newly ereried temple, in the most Shady part of the wood.—This
temple
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	22S
temple is dedicated to love and friend--Jhip,—A concert of Soft flutes, are to
-----O gracious heaven! what do I
hear ?—The Sound of a pistol,—in the library! my God !<—The pen drops from my trembling hand.
Tuefday nighty ten o*clock.
O Madam, what words can paint the ■ -Scene of horror I have to relate !— Colonel Melville—do I live to write it ?—lays breathleSs, having by a pistol Shot himSelf through the head!
, Guefs our astonishment—our miSe-ry at this most shocking—fatal deedll —But oh the poor—distracted Fanny !—Language here fails !—she is— She is—in a state of abSolute phrenzy!
•—Bellmour, it Seems, having heard the fatal Sound, instantly left the ladies, and rushing into the library, found his dearest, best-beloved friend had fallen in the above most rash, and fatal act:—
K 5	the
A LESSON FOR LoVERS.
^	—the unhappy Melville was gone for
ever!
In the genera] confusion and distraction which enfued, it was impofiTible to conceal from Mrs. Melville that fome accident of death had happened; though what the accident is^ She at preSent knows not, excepting fhe thinks her hufband has received his death by the hand of chance.—But thought is now no more.-—For, after remaining in fits for. Some hours, She is now in a state of the N most pity-moving delirium.—Expect not particulars, for, indeed, I am unable to recite them.—Poor—unhappy Bellniour is the picture of silent woe; —and yet obliged to comfort all.
This moment he has given me the enclofed letter, which I fend you, for I am myfelf in too distracted a state to copy it.—The contents will too fully explain the caufe of this dreadful catastrophe.—Here then. Madam, read the letter:—the foul-moving, but truly in-
'itocent.
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	2,27
noccnt cauSe of all our woe.—At preSent I can write no more.—HaralTed to death—my heart bleeding—my eyes fwimming in tears—how can I go on ? —I will date again to-morrow, if I am able to hold my pen.—Oh ! Heaven! is this the happy bridal day ?—But here, my dear Madam, read the fatal letter.^
EARL RICHLEY TO COLONEL MELVILLE.
Richhy Farli.) Sept,
My dear Charles,,
I CANNOT delay a single hour to acquaint you with the joyful news (for Such, I am convinced, it will be to you) that I am just arrived with my beloved child at Richlev-Park, where we both most impatiently wait your arrival.—It will be needleSs for me to beg you to Set out immediately, as you
know
'	I
228	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
know our felicity will be very imperfect till we See you.—Your noble conduct in Amenca, and the fpinted exertions you have shewn in the cauSe of the best of Sovereigns, render you more dear to me than ever.—But your reward shall be proportioned to your merits: —the hand oS my Charlotte is ready to crown my young warisior with happi-nefs:—she is, if poshble, more yours than ever; and, I trust, you will find
her Spotlefs heart a treafure.------The
dear girl has been visibly drooping in your abfence, and has refuSed Some very noble and worthy alliances, for the Sake of her Melville; and whom . I likewise prefer to all the titles and wealth in the world—She has told me'' all—ail she has Suffered in your abfence:
'—she is now standing by me, and hlufies whilst she reads what I am writing.—But why?—were you not engaged to each otTler, by all the ties of tender affection, almost from the days
of
\
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	229
of childhood, as well as from thofe of honour ?—Why then Should our Charlotte blufh at this confession ?
Oh ! my dear boy, my old fond heart is full of this most happy alliance !—Hasten to us, therefore, I be-•feech you, as Soon as poffible.—The lawyers shall be fet to work immediately^.—the folemnity shall be celebrated with the utmost pomp and magnificence :—I will have all the country invited.—I kept open houfe above a month, on account of my happy day,^ when I wedded my Charlotte’s lovely mother.—You shall both do the fame.—I will have no private doings. -—Charlotte wishes (Ite is above all affectation) forfooth, to flip into the chapel with you only. Save myfelf and the parfon ;—and then to hide herfelf, to avoid the parade and formal ceremony of company ufual on thefe occasions.—But I tell htiydi mujI have the management of this affair myfelf, fo
much
230	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
iiinch have I fet my heart upon it.—-I intend to Spend the remainder of my days at my little villa, at North Lodge :—for I shall give up Richley-Park, with its estate and all its appurtenances, immediately, into your and
Charlotte’s poffeffion:------and long—
long may you live to enjoy them!
Your dear bride wishes, I know, to Send you a thouSand loves; but an over:Jirained delicacy, which the fmpU girl cannot get rid of. Subdues Ter inclination.------But come, my dear
Charles, haSten to her willing arms, and to thoSe of your most tenderly, and very affectionate
fnend, and (I will add), father,
RICHLRT.-
P. S,. The bearer of this has orders to find you, if you have left Bath. Adieu.
Mifd.
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	231
Mifs Milhuood, in Continuation,
WHAT a letter has this most worthy, fond father written !—Good old man !—I have been weeping over it.— Poor Lady Charlotte !—she too will be driven to distraction !—Bellmour has just been telling me a few particulars.
—Unhappy Melville !-------Delicate to
exceSs—of honour So nice and exactly fcruplous, what ruin hast thou occasioned !—Ah ! why were virtues given
thee for Such a purpofe -----'But no
more of this preSumption is in the inquiry.
• I must hasten now to the poor for-■ lorn Fanny. Alas! she cannot long Survive !
Monday morning:
ALL—all—my dear madam, is now
over-----the fond—the tender pair, I
trust, are now at peace.—Yes! both, last night, were consigned to the cold
■—the
232	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
—the Silent grave.----My heart is al-
most broken !—I have wept till I can weep no more !—1 will, however, try to fend you a few broken particulars, preceding the most lamentable end of the lovliest woman on earth.
I had watched by her, without inter-mifiion, till Thurfday morning, when her exhausted Spirits Sunk into a little stumber.—In the mean time I stole to^ my apartment, leaving the good Mrs. Nelfon and Several attendants in the room; and,from the silence I afterwards found, hoped her stumber had continued : but, merciful Heaven! what
was my affright------my Shock——too
great, indeed, for utterance—when I faw her enter my apartment, fantastically drest, with a profusion of flowers and jewels, stuck diforderly in her di-siievilled hair !-—She had on, besides, a black cloak, which site had carelesty flung over her stioulders—and a white
and silver petticoat.---All which, it
Seems, her attendants, to pacify her
distraction,
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	233
diStratstion, had Suffered her to put on..
Thus strangely attired—and with the most frantic air of wildneSs—in hasty steps she entered my room. Advancing towards me with an air which harrowed my Soul (ah, madam, alas! she knew me not!) she thus addreffed me.
“ Are you, pray, the lady of this manston ?—Where—where have you
hid him ?----Donst you fee (looking
down on her distracted dreSs)—don’t you See I am ready to attend him to the altar ?«—This—this is my bridal dreSs.—But where is the bridegroom all this time ?—I demand him (ftemly) at the hands of Some of you.—I very —very greviouSly SuSpect Some foul play.—Hark !—Hark 1—my poor Meli ville calls!”
' “ Oh 1 Mrs. NelSon,” Said I, “ she kills me—I cannot bear it.”*—I bursh j ed into tears.—The dear unfortunate
then
234	^ LESSON FOR LOVERS.
then looking up in my face, as if trying- to recollect me, and with a Softer tone of voice, inimitably affecting, exclaimed,—“ Emma!—are you, my Emma Millwood ?—pray tell me,—for, indeed, my poor brain is quite—quite
gone.—Had I not once a huJhanD.----
Hark ! the wedding peal Summons me to the chapel 1—Are the bride-maids all ready ?”—I wept.-—“ W^hy do you weep —What, weep at ^ wedding
“ I will not weep,” anSwered I, “ if my Sweet Fanny will return to her apartment.”
“ 'Fanny V Ihe -exclaimed loudly, “ am I not Mrs. Melville then ?”— and instantly she again relapSed into the most frantic air imaginable.—She broke from us, and darted into the gallery, we cloSely following ; when, unfortunately, the door of the room, where the corpSe of the wretched Melville was deposited, then in a coffin, was just opening by an attendant,
who
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	2^^
who was coming out, she rushed forward, and at one view, Seeing tlie av/-ful recepticle, she flew to its fide, and hastily pushing away the cofiin lid—~
“ Hah ! have I then found my lo ve at last ?—Good Heaven ! I thank thee.— Never—never more will we be Separated—Melville—thy Fanny calls I” —Then obferving the ghastly wound on his temple, flie tenderly exclaimed.
Ah ! my murdered love !—who— who did this
In the instant, she kiffed his cold— palid lips with unutterable tenderneSs, and Sinking on his breast, in an agony of woe, with a heavy groan, she expired.
Oh 1 madam 1—1 must now throw down my pen.—My eyes are drowned in tears.
Fuefday morn,
I now proceed to add a few more words on this mournful Subject.
Believing
236	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
Believing our beloved Fanny to be only in a fainting fit, v/hen fire funk • upon her Melville’s breaSi:, every remedy, that the tender fisiendfliip of Sir Henry Bellmour, his amiable wife, and all preSent could Suggest, was made uSc of to restore her :—but, alas! vain were all our endeavours !—The breath that animated her lovely form, was
sted for ever!------
TheSe haplefs lovers, this enraptured hushand, and lovely bride, of one hour only., were both placed on one-
bier,------were both interred in one
grave, in that very chapel in which.
So few days fince, they had received each other’s vows, at the altar! I am, my dear Madam,
your affectionate, afflicted daughter,
EMMA MILLWOOD.
‘ ICD Sir Henry Bellmour, the day after the funeral, diSpatched a letter to Earl Richley to inform him of this fad
disaster.
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	237
difaster, together with the caufes that led his unhappy friend to give his hand to MiSs Sidney, in feeming violation of the Solemn engagement that had pasted ' between him and Lady Charlotte ; aS-furhig him, that nothing but a full con-viflion of that Lady’s marriage with a gentleman in Ireland, as announced in the London papers, could have prevailed with his truly deferving friend to unite himSelf to another, however dear that other might have been to him. He reminded his Lordship of the strict honour that had ever accompanied the actions of that most amiable of men, and beSeeched him not to harbour any opinions unfavourable to his memory, and to become his pleader with Lady Charlotte, both as a justice due-to de-ceafed merit, and as a balm of comfort to the astlicted mind of that Lady, under So distressful a circumstance.
Earl Richley, on reading the letter, felt the most poignant anguish. Parental
238	A LESSON FOR LOVfiRS.
rental affection for his lovely daughter; the dreadful effects that might follow when she should hear the fate of her Melville; the many virtues poffeffed by that unfortunate, but generous-minded man ; the shocking manner of his death ; the occasion of it; thefe alternately rnshed on his tortured mind ; a tumult of conflicting paffions took poffesiion of his breast : his inmost.foul was shook; and all his faculties were at once fuSpended.—He dropt on the floor, and remained, for Some time, in a state of total inSensibility.—Before he had well recovered his dishpated fenfes, and just when he had power Sufficient to re-feat himfelS in the chair from whence he had fallen, his adored daughter entered the room, and beheld her beloved parent in a condition that called for all her fortitude to Sustain. She ran to him, and taking him tenderly by the hand, earnestly requested to know the cauSe of his affliction.—:De-
prived
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.'	239
prived of the power of utterance, and foreseeing not the confec[uences that might follow from a too precipitate information, he pointed to the letter on the table.—She haStily took it np, with a mind forboding Some heavy mif-fortune.—But what words can defcribe the emotions She felt on reading, that her Melville was married to another?
-—^On reading he was dead —On reading his own rash hand had deprived him of life?—On reading that the horrid deed was done from a delicate, but mistaken principle of honour, in having given too eafy credit to the forged tale of her being already marned ?—A violent Scream proclaimed the disposition of her mind in that dreadful moment ; horrors of the most dreadful kind fuc-cesiively affailed her, overpowered her weak frame, and she instantly fell mo-tionlefs at the feet of her affrighted father.—But not to dwell too long on fo melancholy a fubjest, it will be Sufficient
240	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
cient to fay, that, after a lingering ili-nefs of Several months, in which her adored Melville was constantly on her mind, this admirable lady resigned her fpotleSs Soul into the hand of that Almighty Power who alone was capable to form and give it.
Thus were three amiable and worthy perSons plunged in the deepest mi-fery, and precipitated to the grave, by the baSe arts of a woman devoted to intrigue.—The reader will easily recollect the character of K. Freelove in the former volume, and by that means be at no loSs for a farther explanation.
How pregnant of morality is this little history !—In the eye of eternal rec-titude., Fuhich feeeth not as man feeeth., the Smallest deviation from the path of fin-cerity is, doubtlefs, highly culpable.— Alas! v/hilst we are paying the tribute of a pity mg tear to Sufferings like theSe, let us still reflect, that if the noble-minded Melville,—great, and many as
his
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	24I
his virtues were—-had not ajjentcd to Earl Richley to give his hand (too often, and too fatally done, alas !) where he could not give his heart., this dreadful cataStroplie had been prevented.
But I leave it to the intelligent rea-
o
der’s reflections, to expatiate farther on the miferies attending an affurance of the lips, where the heart affents not: I will only add this plain maxim of the poet, which conveys an instruction well worth regarding:
’Tis not enough tho’ fenSe and taste may join o ^ In all our words fincerity must Shine.”
,	' T H E E N D.
■ L
ERRATA, VoL. II.
Page. Line.
56	14 for Godwin, read Goodwin.
12 for he, read we.
69	2 for too, read two.
104	2 for flagrant, read fragrant.
^34	^5 Ar Then, Yet.
' ■ ' ' ■
' \
■	.	■	^ S '"Li
V ■■ V'
-	‘	'■ ' I
, - ■ ■: ■ -.'’1
■ ■ ^ . ■■ ' •■^#1
,	:■	• ■ ? j
L' \	■ ..; -1
■'	,	-	. ■ ^ ■	■■	. . 'j
■	■	' S' ■	'■	.	V V • - •' ■ ■ J
' ■'■ Vi
.	- L'i ■	.	/	I _
SI."-	’ ■■'■s	• i
■	,,	O N	- '
k	■ ■ '
te \	■■ V
• !■■
r- ' ■
I s-' / ,	,v'
:>	■ V,	.	•	■	.
■:k	„ '	. ' '	■ ' ^
■
cl.-	^
Lil'SN- ■	■. -	. . \	■	-
fA '■ ■ . \. ■ ; ,
tN" ^	'* '	■ /.» \ ■	■'	■'■
’-f '	■-■•	-	~	■
' -■ ‘ ■' '■ ' *
. ' • '.' V ■■ ■ '».•■ ^ * •.
■'L-A A	'.CVTC	:
V ' ■■ ^ ^V-S-C' ■ ?	/ '/'	■.	'
■■	■ ‘r '-	- 'i'.f,'-
. • ' ■ ■ F"' • • .
’•'.D3(hir*i!#di:''T^^'■	-2	■
i ',	.-■ ";'i '	■-!■>?■■■ "''	■	•
:	-i	^ ■■	s.,-'
" •yi'V'vTgW	■■ ■	■ '■*	': •*	*: ■■ .
'■■ -	■ '. •C'Ct	■	- Vi>: A
■ v ' ' ^ ' ' ' ■	■ ' - Ay ^
L .	<r-.-‘r''~—rj'.'Jgt..-.. -	vv . ,
?' ■ ■ ■ , ' . -I ^
' ' * . ■ - ‘ ^ ;
% •
/
^ .]/
r-	N\	V. .	•
S-	^	'	A-S	'	.D I
'■<	N C	Ni.	^
i) .
e ;\	T	. :^	\
'vA	:
' - A' \ S : ■ -
I"	■	A,	V	'■■,
\ J. N\ -	^
>■■	-v^	V-
'^•v	'>
■-	• I
- A b
r '^	■ T ' b
v4...A'("' •	.
,/ 2 ' ■ 1
"	^	/ - ij
- - - • .AS’''	i ‘	•	■ '	« '
'	- . V-	'■ ■	■-	'	’
■ ■ - •	* •	, C" s5r r s'"' . ■ '
’ *' ■ ' ■ ■ ■■ -
.»■ ■ . ■ * ' ' -
%
i.
r -	■	'	.	■	.	,
t-'- . .. . •-.'	■
;4'f'^i	■	■ ,	'
V	■	'	.	‘	'•
«fl»
r .', .	•
kh	.- •' ‘
