Lover-Letters
FROM 
King HENRY VIII.
TO 
Anne Boleyn, &c. 
----------------
(Price One Shilling.) 

LOVE-LETTERS
FROM 
King HENRY VIII. 
TO 
ANNE BOLEYN:
Some in French, and Some in English. 
To which are added, 
TRANSLATIONS of Those 
Written in French, 
WITH AN 
APPENDIX, 
CONTAINING 
TWO LETTERS from Anne Boleyn,
To Cardinal Wolsey; 
With Her Last to HENRY the VIIIth.
--------------------------------------------------
conjugium pactamque fidem non crimina posco. Ovid. 
--------------------------------------------------
LONDON: 
Printed for J. CHURCHILL, at the Black-
Swan in Pater-Noster-Row, MDCCXIV. 

THE 
PREFACE. 

The Original Letters from King 
Henry the VIIIth to Anne Boleyn 
are in the Vatican Library, where
they are shewn to all Strangers.
About Thirty Years ago. Dr.Fall late Precentor
of York, took a Copy of them, which he Colla-
ted very carefully with the Original, as he assu-
red the Bishop of Salisbury, to whom he made 
a Present of it. The, Bishop thought the Let-
ters had some Expressions which made them un-
fit for a Place in his Collection at the End of 
his Third Volume of the History of the Refor-
mation, and therefore sent them to the Printer 
to be Published apafr, in justification of the Ob- 
servations he has made upon them in that 
Book. 

They are Printed exably from Dr.Fall's 
Copy, without correcting so much as the False 

[ii]
Spelling either in French or English, that the 
King's true manner of Writing might appear 
even in the minutesr Particulars; for which 
Reason also his Cyphers and Devices are imita-
ted. The French Letters are Translated to sa-
tisfy the curiosity of the English Reader, with 
as little Variation from the Literal Meaning of 
the Words, as the different Phrase of the Lan-
guages would allow. 

It was thought likewise that some Introdu-
ction would be necessary to make the Letters ge-
nerally understood; and therefore since the Bi-
shop would not give himself any further trou-
ble about them the Fublifier was advised to 
employ some Friend to give a short View of 
the remarkable Transactions which preceeded 
them and gave occasion to them. This, with a
few Reflections on the Letters themselves, 
may give an ordinary Reader some Notion of 
the Grounds of King Henry's Divorce, and 
may arm him against the Calumnies of the Pa-
pists on that subject. This is only intended 
for the Use of those, who have not Leisure or 
Opportunities to see that Matter fully explained 
in the Bishop's History of the Reformation. 

To follow then the Order of time; It may 
first he observed, that in K. Hen-
[Hist. Refor. Part I.]
ry the VIIth's time, his Eldest 
[Nov.14.1501.]
Son Prince Arthur, being past
Fifteen Tears of Age, was Mar-
ried to the Princess Catharine of Spain, 
who 

[iii]
was Elder than himself; that they lived toge-
ther as Man and Wife for several 
[April 2. 1502.]
Months and then Prince Arthur 
dying, it was resolved for Reasons of State 
that Prince Henry should Marry his Brother's 
Widow. This was opposed by Warham Arch-
bishop of Canterbury as absolutely unlawful,
but advised by Fox Bishop of Winchester, who 
thought all Difficulties would be removed by a 
Dispension from Rome; accord-
[Dec.25.1503.]
ingly a Bidlwas obtained to that 
Effect, and they were Married, the Prince be-
ing yet under Age. But Warham had fo pos-
sess'd the King with Scruples against this Mar-
riage, that the Day on which the Prince was 
of Age, he by his Father's Order 
[June 22.1505.]
protected against it as Null and  
Void; and Henry the VIIth, with his Dying
Breath persisted in charging his Son to break it 
off entirely. However, when Henry the VIIIth 
came to the Crown, it was resolved in Council 
that he should renwe his Marri-
[June 3. 1509.]
age, which was done Publicky, 
and he had several Children by the Queen, who 
all dyed young, except the Lady Mary. 

After this there appeared no farther Disqui-
et in the King's Mind, nor any Sign of an in-
tended Divorce, till the Year 1524, when Car-
dinal Wolfety, by his Legantine Mandate, 
Published a Bull of the Pope's against those that 
contracted Marriage within the forbidden De-

[iv]
grees. This Mandate is yet extant in the Re-
gifter of Fisher Bishop of Rochester. What 
followed, makes this justly suspected to have 
been done on the King's Account. To confirm 
which Suspicion, there is a concurring Circum-
stance in a Letter from Simon Grineus to Bu-
cer, Dated Sept. 10. 1531, where 
[Hist. Refor. Part I.]
he says, The King had declared 
to him that he had abstained 
from Queen Catherine for Seven Tears 
upon Scruples of Conscience. 

However, tho's the King had Scruples at 
that time, yet he concealed thetn carefully from 
the World for some Years; and the immediate 
Occasion of their breaking out, seems to have 
been given by the French Ambas-
[March 2.1527.] 
sadors, who came England to 
treat of several Matters, and particularly of a 
Marriage between the Princess Mary and the 
French King, or the Duke of Orleans his Se-
cond Son. This Alternative was 
[April 30.1527. Hall.]
at last agreed, tho' it remained 
some time in suspence, Because
"President of the Parlia-
ment of Paris doubted, Whether the Mar-
riage between the King and her Mother, be0
ing his Brother’s Wife, were good or no."
The Bishop of Tarbe made the 
[Herbert.]
same Objection, and renewed it to 
the King's Ambassadors in France, as appears 
by King Henry's Speech to the Mayor and Citi-

[v]
zens of London concerning his Scruples, where 
he says, "When our Ambassade was last in 
France, and Motion was made, That the
Duke of orleance should Marry our sayd
Daughter, one of the Chief Councaylores to 
the French King sayd, It were well done 
to know, whether she be the King of Eng-
land's lawfull Daughter, or not; for well
known it is, that he begat her on his Bro-
thers Wife, which is directly contrary to 
God's Law, and his Precept". That this 
Councellor was the Bishop of Tarbe, is af-
firm'd by the Bishop of Bayonne, 
in the Account he gives of this 
[Hist. Ref. Part III.]
Speech to the Court of France, in 
a Letter dated the 27th of Nov. 1528; yet 
this very Bishop, of Tarbe was afterwards ad-
vanced to be a Cardinal, and was so far from 
retracting his Opinion, that when he was Car-
dinal of Grandemont, in a Letter dated the 
27th of March, 1530, he writes to the 
French Court, “That he had served the 
Lord Rochford, (Anne Boleyn's Father) all 
he could, and that the Pope had three se-
veral times said to him in Secret, that he 
wished the Marriage had been already made 
in England, either by the Legate’s Dispensa-
tion, or otherwise; provided it was not done 
by him, nor in Diminution of his Authority, 
under Pretence of the Laws of God".
This Conduct shews, That it was not Religion, 

[vi] 
but Political Views, that turn'd the Court of 
Rome against the King's Cause, which they at 
first plainly favoured. 

And now after this short Account of the Cir-
cumstances that gave the Beginning to the King's
Scruple's, it will be proper to consider the Argu-
ments by which he fortified himself
[Hist. Ref. Part. I.]
in them. These, as he himself
own'd, were, that he found by the 
Law of Moses. If a Man took his Brother’s 
Wife, they should die Childless; this made 
him reflect on the Death of his Children, which 
he now looked on as a Curse from God, for 
that unlawful Marriage. He found Thomas
Aquinas (whom he chiefly valued of all the 
Casuists,) of Opinion, That the Laws of Le-
viticus, about the forbidden Degrees of Mar-
riage, were Moral and Eternal, such as obliged 
all Christians; and that the Pope could only 
dispense with the Laws of the Church, but not 
with the Laws of God; for this Reason, That 
no Laws can be dispenced with by any Autho-
rity, but that which is Equal to the Authority 
that Enacted it: It may be observed, That as 
these Arguments were of Force in themselves 
so they were yet stronger to a True Roman-Ca-
tholick than to another Man; for when the 
Validity of the Marriage came afterwards to
bee thoroughly canvassed, it appeared that the
whole Tradition of the Church, and the Opini-
ons of its Doctos were against the Marriage,

[vii] 
and the Arguments for its Validity were ta-
ken from private Explications of Scripture and 
Reasonings from them.

In the Year 1527, before Cardinal Wolfey's 
Journey to France, which he began on the 3rd 
of July, The King's Scruples were 
[Stow, Hall]
become Publick, as Two Writers 
testify almost in the same Words: "This Sea-
son, joys Hall, began a Same in London, 
the King’s Confessor the Bishop of Lin-
coln, called Dr. Langland, and divers other 
great Clerks, had told the King, that the 
Marriage between him and the Lady Kather-
rine, late Wife to his Brother Prince Ar-
thur, was not Good, but Damnable; and the 
King thereupon should Marry the Duchess
Alanson at the Town of Calais this Sum-
mer; and the Viscount Rochfort had brought 
with him the Picture of the said Lady, and 
that at his return out of France the Car-
dinal should pass the Sea to go into France 
to fetch her."

This Suspicion of the Cardi-
[Herbert.] 
nal's going to promote a Second 
Match in France is confirm'd by a Letter of 
his, Dated Feversham, July the 5th, 1527, 
where he says, Archbishop Warham had warned 

[viii]
him of the great Jealousies which Queen Cathe-
[Hist. Reform. Past I.]
rine had of his Journey. And 
by another Letter Dated August 
the Ist, 1527, where he labours
to satisfy the King, That the Pope's Dispensa-
tion was in its self Null and Void. All these 
Particulars will be the stronger Proofs of the 
Cardinal's Intention, when it shall be proved 
that the Cardinal could then have no Thoughts
of Anne Boleyn. What he did in this Nego-
tiation was kept secret; but it seems it was very
agreeable to the French, for they sent great 
Acknowledgments the next Year for the Honour 
of his Embassy, by Ambassadors of 
the First Rank, who came to see 
the King of England swear to the League 
with their Master, upon which Occasion Hall 
writes, “The common People Said, What 
needs all this Swearing, The French King
was once Sworn, and all his Nobility; yea, 
and all his good Towns; but yet they brake 
with us, and So will they 
[Hall.]
again when they see an Ad-
vantage. But to return from this Digression, 
to the History of Mistress Boleyn. It must be 
observed, that in the end pf May 1527, the 
Lord Rochford her Father came over to En-
[Hist. Refore. Part I.] Picture to shew 
it to King Henry, and it was then 

[ix]
then in all probability that Anne Boleyn came 
over with him, for tho' she had been in En-
gland in 1522, yet she did not 
[Camden.]
stay long, but returned into the 
Service of Claude Queen of France, where she 
coutinued till that Queen dyed, which was in 
1524, and then went into the Duchess of 
Alanson Service, which she left probably at 
this time. Soon after her coming into En-
gland she was taken into Queen Catherine's 
Court, where the Lord Peircy courted her, and 
was upon the Point of Marrying 
[Cavendish.]
her, had not Cardinal Wolfey, by 
the King's Order prevented it; and as the 
same Author assures us, it was not till after the 
Cardinal's return from France, which was on 
the last Day of September 1527, that the King 
opened his Affection for Anne Boleyn to 
him. 

From this short View of the Transactions 
that preceded the King's Affection to Anne Bo-
leyn, it appears how unjust a Calumny of
the Papists it is to say. That the King 
would never have had Thoughts of a Di-
vorce, or Scruples against his first Marri-
age, had, not his unlawful Passion for Mi-
tress Boleyn prompted him to them. So 
far is this from true, that it is plainly 
proved, that the King's Scruples were 

[x]
infused in him from his Infancy, on the justest  
Grounds; that they were revived in
[1524.] 
him 3 years before they Publick, 
and that they were commonly talk'd 
of, and a New Match contrived for him to 
the Duchess of Alanson, before Anne Boleyn 
appear'd at Court. The Letters will set this
Matter yet in a cleared Light. 

But before I make any Remarks on these, I 
must first give a short Account of the King's
Negotiations at Rome, without which 
[Hist. Ref. Part I.]
some of them cannot be understood. 
In the End of 1527, The King solli-
[Hist. Ref. Part III.]
cited the Peope for a Commission to 
judge the Validity of his marriage 
with Queen Catherine, which after
[Rhymer Tom XIV.]
some time was obtained in a Bull, 
dated the 13th of April, 1528, em-
powering Cardinal Wolfey, with the Archbi-
shop, or any other English Bishop, to judge the 
Marriage. But this was not made Use of
perhaps because it was thought, that a 
Stranger ought to be employed, that the Pro-
ceeding might be more impartial. 
[Hebert.]
So a New Commission was desired, 
and obtained, bearing Date the 6th 
of June, in which the Cardinals Wolfey and 
Compegio (an Italian) were appointed joynt
Legates to judge the marriage. And to make

[xi]
this the surer, there was a Pollicitation (or 
Promise) procured on the 23rd of July, 1528, 
That the Pope would never inhibit or re-
voke this Commission to judge the Marriage; 
and a Decretal Bull, which contain'd an Ab- 
solute Decision of the Cause, which was only 
shewn to the King, and Cardinal Wolfey, 
by Campegio; but all these Precautions 
which were admitted of, when the Pope was
in a distress'd Condition, did not refrain his 
Holiness from sending one Campana before 
the End of the Year, to see the Decretal 
Bull secretly Burnt; and from recalling the 
Legate's Commission, and avocating the Cause 
to Rome the next Year, wphen his Affairs 
were more flourishing, and the Emperor
(who was Queen Catherine's Nephew) had 
granted all his Demands. I am shorter in 
this Relation of the Pope's Proceedings, than 
the Consequence it had may seem to have re-
quired: But it is not my Design in this 
Preface to give a Compleat History of the 
Divorce, but only to mention such Things as 
will sway with the English Reader in the 
King's Justification; and I hope to such a one, 
the Good or Bad Success of the Cause at the 
Court of Rome, will not signify much to 
prove its Justice or Injustice. 

[xii] 
And now to make same Observations on the 
Letters themselves. It may be presumed rea-
sonably, that if there had been any Thing in 
them that had reflected on the King's Ho-
nour, or on Anne Boleyn's, they would cer-
tainly have been Publish'd by the Papists at 
that very Time; for they were in their Hands 
soon after they were Written, as appears 
from this Passage in Lord Herbert's Hi-
story. 

"When Cardinal Campegio came to take 
Ship, the Searchers, upon Pretence he 
carried either Money or Letters from Eng-
land to Rome, ransack'd all his Coffers,
Bags, and Papers, not without Hope, cer-
tainly, to recover that Decretal Bull our 
King so much long’d for. I find also (by 
some Relation) that divers Love-Letters
betwixt our King and Mistress Boleyn,
being convey’d out of the King’s Cabinet, 
were sought for, though in vain; they ha-
ving been formerly sent to Rome". To 
explain this Account, it must be supposed, 
that upon Anne Boleyn's return to Court, 
the King perswaded her to let him lay up 
these Letters in his Cabinet, as the surest 
Place to keep them from, being stole; since it 
would have done them both great Prejudice, if
they had come Abroad at the time of the Tryal. 

(xiii)
But this Supposition does not seem so na-
tural as another which is, that they were 
taken, not out of the King's, but out of 
Anne Boleyn's Cabinet: This is the more 
probable, because in Fact they are all Let-
ters from the King to her; whereas if, 
his Cabinet had been rifled her Answers to 
him would have been more likely to be 
found there. It were to he wished, that 
these Answers could be discovered, for there 
is just reason to expect in them, accom-
plish'd Pieces both for Thought and Ex-
pression. To which the Reader will easily a-
gree, when he looks into the Jew that are 
Extant of her Writing, which are subjoin-
ed in an APPENDIX; the last of 
them, indeed is by far the most to be ad-
mired; for as the Occasion of it required 
the utmost Effort of her Mind, so nothing 
could be Penned in a more exalted Strain. 

The King's Letters to Anne Boleyn 
were written, in all probability, immediately 
after her Dismission from the 
Courts which was done to silence 
(Herbert.)
the Clamours of the People on 
her Account; but she was sent away in so 
Abrupt a manner, that she determined to 
absent her self altogether; which made the 
King soon Repent of his Severity, and

(xiv)
press her to come back; but this was not 
obtained for a long time, nor without great 
Difficulty; as appears by some of the fol-
lowing Letters. The Time of her Dismission 
was not till May, 1528, for 
(Bib. Harl. 39. B. 4.)
there is a Letter extant from 
Fox to Gardiner at Rome, da-
ted London, May the 4th, 1528, 
where he writes, Of his landing at Sand-
wich, May the 2d, ---- His coming that 
Night to Greenwich, where the King lay, 
---- His being commanded to go to Mi-
stress Anne's Chamber in the Tilt-Yard ----
And declaring to her their Expedition in 
the King’s Cause, and their hastening the 
coming of the Legate ---- To her great 
Rejoycing and Comfort ---- Then came the 
King, to whom he delivered his Letters, 
---- And opened his Negotiations ----
Then he went to the Cardinal, &c.

Soon after the Date of this Letter she 
was dismiss'd; for in the First of the Let-
ters that follow, the King makes Excuses 
for the Necessity of their being asunder; 
and in the Second complains of her Un-
willingness to return to Court. In neither 
of thfe is there a Word of the Sweating 
Sickness, which raged violently in June;
and of which he speaks in his Third Let-

(xv)
ter as of a Thing that had lasted some Time, 
and of which he had form’d many Obser-
vations from Experience, Between this Let-
ter, which seems to have been writ in July, 
and the Sixth, which mentioning the Legates 
arrival at Paris, must have been written in 
the End of September, there are Two Let-
ters, which by the Earnestness of the Busi-
ness were plainly written within a 
[Letter the Vth]
few Days of one another. Probably 
soon after the latter of these was 
sent by the King, where he expressed how 
much he was pleased with her An-
swer to his earnest Desire in the
[Letter the IVth.] 
former, in the Heat of his Grati-
tude, he paid a Visit to his Mistress, in 
which Time they wrote a joynt Letter to 
Cardinal Wolfey, which is added in the 
APPENDIX, where the King expresses 
his Wonder, that he has not yet heard of 
the Legate, Campegio's Arrival at Paris;
which makes it probable this happened in 
September. The King stayed not long with 
her after this; for when she had received 
the Cardinal's Answer, she writes a second 
Letter, without mentioning the King's being 
there; and again shews Impatience to hear of 
the Legate’s coming, of which the King gave 
her the first News soon after. 

(xvi)
But to return to the Fourth Letter, which 
from all these Particulars may be supposed 
to have been written in August; it is the 
most Important in all the Collection, for it 
fixes the Time when his affebion to Anne 
Boleyn began. He complains in it, That 
he had been above a whole Year struck 
with the Dart of Love, and not yet sure 
whether he shall fail, or find a Place in 
her Heart and Affection. 

Now by the Nature of his Complaint, 
it is visible, that he pleads all the Merit 
that a long Attendance could give him; and
therefore if instead of a Year, he could have 
called it a Year and a Half or Two Years, 
he would certainly have done it, to make 
his Argument the stronger. It may likewise 
be probably concluded from the same Words, 
that he had not then known her much a-
bove Half a Year; for it would have been 
an ill Compliment, in himto let her under-
stand that he had seen her some time, 
before he was at all in Love with-
her.

These Remarks confirm the Account al-
ready given, of her coming from France 
with her Father, and by that means serve

(xvii)
to Establish the King's Vindication from the 
Scandal thrown on him by the
(Sanders de Schism. Ang.)
about his Marriage till he saw 
Anne Boleyn. The manner of the whole seems to 
have been this; the French Ambassadors objected 
to the King's Marriage in March 1527. This gave 
him Thoughts of a Divorce; upon which the 
Lord Rochford going to France in the begin-
ning of May, was employed to get the Duchess 
of Alanson's Picture, which he brought over 
accordingly in the End of that 
(Hall.)
Month. The Cardinal who was 
sent to France in the beginning of July, was 
instructed to promote this Match; for which 
end he writes from France to the King, to con-
firm him in his Scruples. But while the Car-
dinal was thus employed, Mistress Boleyn who 
had come over with her Father my Lord Roch-
ford, had shewn her self at Court, and made 
such Impressions on the King's Thoughts, that 
the Match in France was order'd to be dropp'd;
and the Cardinal when he came 
(Cavdendish.)
ever in the End of September, 
knew the Reason of it from the King's own 
Mouth, probably before Mrs. Boleyn her self 
knew of the King's Affection; for it was after 
this that her Correspondence with the Lord 
Piercy, was broke by the Cardinal at the King's 
Order. But now that the King thought it 

(xviii)
would he a means to perswade her to love him 
the better, he in this Letter tells her, that long 
before she suspected it, from his first seeing her 
he felt a Passion for her. In this Representa-
tion I have repeated many Things said before 
in the Series of Matters as they happened, but 
I thought it best to lay them thus together once 
more in one View. 

It may be here questioned, how the time of 
any particular Letter can be known, since they 
have no Date, and therefore may have keen put 
out of their Order. But those that will read 
them with any Attention, will find a Chain of 
Circumstances referred to, that plainly shew 
they were laid together by one that knew the 
Order in which they were Written, very likely 
by Anne Boleyn her self; and whoever stole 
then, as he took them all together, so would be 
careful no doubt to keep them in the Order he 
found them in, that the Discoveries to be made 
from them might be the more complete. 

It will not be doubted by any that read these 
Letters, that the King's Affection to Anne Bo-
leyn was altogether upon honourable Terms. 
There appears no Pretension to any Favours, but 
when the Legates shall have paved the Way. There 
is so frequent mention of this, that Instances of 
it would dwell a Preface too much. There is 

(xix)
but one Offence that can he taken at these Let-
ters, which is, that there are indecent Expressi- 
ons in them. But this is to be imputed to the 
Simplicity and Unpoliteness of that Age, which 
allowed too great Liberties of that Sort; and it 
must be own'd by his Enemies, that there are but 
Three or Four of these Sallies in all the Colle-
ction, and that there are Letters which make 
much more for the King's Piety and Virtue, 
than those Irregularities can fully his Chara-
cter. 

In the Fifth Letter he tells her, God can 
do it if he pleases; to whom I pray once a 
Day for that end, and hope that at length my 
Prayers will be heard. 

In the Sixth, I trust shortly to enjoy, what 
I have so long longed for, to God’s Pleasure, 
and our both Comforts. 

In the Ninth, Praying God, that (and it be 
his Pleasure) to send us shortly togydder. 
Surely these Religious expressions would have 
been very improper, to make an unlawful Passion
succeed. 

In the Thirteenth, speaking of the ill Chara-
cter of one that was proposed to be made Abbess 
of Wilton, he writes, I would not for all the

(xx)
Gold in the World, clog your Conscience not 
mine, to make her Ruler of a House, which is 
of so ungodly Demeanour; nor I trust you 
would not, that neither for Brother nor Sister 
I should so destain mine Honour or Consci-
ence. The whole Letter is of an excellent 
Strain, and would have been a very improper 
Exhortation to one against whose Vertue he had
a Design. 

The Last of the Letters mentions the Legate's 
Illness, as a Reason why he had not yet enter'd
upon his Office; which shews that the Corre-
spondence ended at least in May 1529, when 
the Process began.

There is but one Thing after the Letters, that 
it seems very material to add here in the King's 
Defence, and that is the Approbation of his Cause 
by the Learned Men of Europe.

During the Tryal, Warham and Fisher, 
who were Advocates for the Queen, declared 
That they having been lately con-
(Rymer. Tom. xiv.)
sulted by the King, &c. had an-
swered, that the King’s Consci-
ence was disturbed and shaken, not without 
the weightiest and strongest Reasons. 

[xxi]
After the Legates had trifled some Months 
and at last, Campegio, under a Pretence of the 
Rules of the Court of Rome, had adjourned 
the Court for Three Months; during which 
time he obtained an Avocation from the Pope; 
the King was advised by Cranmer, not to de-
pend longer on the Decisions of the See of 
Rome, but to consult the several Universities 
of Europe, as well as his own, about the Vali-
dity of his Marriage. 

One Crook employed in this Negotia-
tion, and he obtained the Opinion of almost all 
the Universities whither he went, 
for the Nullity of the Marriage:
(Hist. Refor. Part I.)
Yet he complains in his Letters 
that he was in great Straits from the small 
Allowance he had. And in an Original Bill 
of his Accounts it appears, that he never gave 
above a few Crowns to any that writ on the 
King's Side; whereas, the Emperor gave a Be-
nefice of 500 Ducats to one, and of 600 
Crowns to another, that writ for the Queen. 
Yet, though on the one Side Men were poorly 
paid for their Trouble, and on the other richly 
rewarded, yet the most eminent Men were uni-
versally for the King. It may here be added, 
that Erasmus, whose Name was in the greatest
Esteem at that time, though he could not be 

(xxii)
prevailed with to write for the King, for fear 
of the Pope, and the Emperor, in whose Domi- 
nions he lived; yet he went so far as to give 
great Encomiums of the Worth and Virtues 
of Sir Thomas Boleyn, then Earl of Wilt-
shire, in his Book De preparatione ad Mortem, 
which he dedicates to him; and this was all 
the Approbation that his Circumstances made it 
convenient for him to shew of the King's 
Cause.

On this general Consent of the Learned in 
his Favour, the King was told he might pro-
ceed to a Second Marriage, the First being of 
it self Null and Void; and ac-
(Hist. Reform. Part III.)
cordingly he Marryed Anne Bo-
leyn on the 25th of January, 1533. 

This short Representation of the Transactions 
relating to the King's Cause, with the Letters 
themselves that follow, may serve to convince
the Reader, with how little reason the Papist 
insult us upon that Subject. The Writer of 
this Preface has been a Witness of one In-
stance of this Raillery, which is, their shew-
ing these Letters at Rome to the English, as 
the shameful Beginning of our Reformation. 
But there is a fresher one, where their Malice 
and Impudence appears to the Height, which 
they intended probably to carry on some Schemes 

(xxiii)
that have lately proved Abortive, and that is 
a large Poem in Quarto, by Thomas Ward, 
Printed at Hamborough, 1710, where the
History of England, from the Beginning of 
Henry the VIIIth, to Oates's Plot is given, 
and the whole Progress of the Reformation, 
scurrilously ridiculed in Burlesque Verse. But
all these Impotent Attacks need no other An-
swer, than a just Account of the Facts them-
selves. 

L E T. 
[ ■ ] 
LETTERS 
Written by 
K. nrv/jfthe Vlllth 
T O 
Anne Bolejn. 
s 
L E T T R E I. 
Maitrejfe et Amie., moy d’ mon 
coeuy sen remettent en vos mains 9^ M n ^ 1- 1 
vous juppliant les avoir pourrecom 
mander a votre bonne grace., df. 
que par absence votre affebion northeast lew soit dl 
minue. Car pur augmenter leur pain ce feroit 
■grande pitie.^ car Vahjence leur fait ajfez, et 
plus que jamais je neuffe pense, en nous fal 
F An.. 
tel, Tant plus lohig que les Mores font., tant plus eloigne eft le soleil et non obftant plus fer vent.^ aujji fait udie notre amour., par ah fence nous fonmes eloignez, ^ nednmoins ilgarde fa ferveur au moins de notre cofte. Ay ant en efpoit la pareille du mtre, vous affeurant que de ma part V ennuye'de /’ ahfence deja m*eft troj grande, Et quand je pense a P augmentation diceluy que par force faut que je foufre, II fc eft presque intolerable, su n eftoit la fermt Espoir que j*ayf de votre indissoluble affebior vers ?noy ^ et pur le vous rementevoir alium fois cela, et voyant que perfonellement je m puis efire en votre prejence, chose la plus appro chante a cela qui ni eft pojfible au present jt vous envoye, ceft a dire ma pibure., wise et hrajfeletths a toute la devise que deja Jcavez mefouhaittant en lew place quant il vous plat toit, P eft de la main de 
Votre serviteur et amy 
Translation of L 
Y Mistress and Fstend, I and my Heari put ourselves in your Hands, beggins 
[ 3 ] 
otto let Absence lesssen your affestion to us For it Were great pity to increase our Pain, which Absence alone does Sufficiently, and more than I could ever have thought ^ bringing to my Mind a Point of Astronomy, which is. That the farther the .Mores are from us, the farther too is the Sun, and yet his Heat is the more Scorching ^ soit is with our Love, we are at a distance from one another, and yet it keeps its Fervency, at least on my Side. I hope the like on your Part, assuring you that the uneafiness of Absence is already too Severe for me, and when I think of the continuance of that which I must of necessity Suffer, it would Seem intolerable to me, were it not for the firm hope I have of your unchangeable affe dion for me ^ and now to put you Sometimes in mind of it, and Seeing I cannot be present in person with you, I Send you the nearest thing to that possible, [that is, my Picture Set in Bracelets, with the whole Device, which you ' know already, wishing myself in their Place, when it shall please you. This from the Hand of 
^' Your Servant and Friend, 
H. Rex. 
^ This is a literal trotjlation of this Sentence but the mean 
[4] 
wm¥'wmmm‘wmmwwwsw0wmwwmmmm 
L E T T R E II 
A HI a Maitreffe, 
P OUR ce qui ftit, femhle le temps eftre Men ^ long depms avoir ouy de votre bonne fan te.j de vous. La grande affetlion que fay vers vous m a perfuadh de vous envoyer ce por teur pour efre mieux ajfertene de votre fante volojith.^df pour ce que depms mon partement de avec vous., on tri a averty que V opinion en quoy je vous Idijfoye eft de tout afeure change., <df que vous voidie^ venir en cour ni avec Madame votre mere ny autrement aussi, Lequel ra port ejlant yray, je northeast fauroy ajfez emerveillier veux quf depuis je rp ajfiire de vous Eavoir jamais faite faute, il me semble hien petite retribution pour le grand Amour que je vous por te de me eloigner CV la perfotme le perfo 91 age de la femme du monde que plus f efli me^ (IF fi., vous ni ayme& de ft bonne affeeh on comme f efpere\ Je fuis sure que la eloigne ment de notre deux Personnes' vous feroit un peu ennuyeufe, toute fois qtlil n appartient pas tant a la Maitreffe comme au serviteur, pensez bien ma Meflrejfe que /* ahfence de vous fort me grief efperant qilil tie ft pas votre vo lontf qiw amjtce soit., mats Ji je entendoy pur 
\ ^ ^ r # ^ /\ / y ^ ^ ^ 1 ma J ^ mm m ^ ^ ^ 
[ 5 ] 
non puis md.is fair ft non pld.mdre nidi tnau^ vaife fortune en rehauant peu a peu ma grande foul., & ainsi faulte de temps say fin de ma rude Lettre fupplyant de donner foi a ce por teur a de quil vous dir a de ma part, Efcrit de la jtdain du tout votre serviteur, 
I 
Tranfiation n L E T T E R II 
4 
To my Mijfrefi., 
DE C A U S E the Time Seems to me very ^ long, since I have heard from you, or concerning your Health ^ the great Affection I have for you has obliged me to Send this Bearer to be better informed both of .your Health and Pleasure, particularly because since my last parting with you, I have been told, that you have entirely changed the Opinion in which I left you, and that you would neither come to Court with your Mother, nor any other way *, which report if true, I cannot enough wonder at, being persuaded in my own Mind that I have never committed any, Offence against you ^ and it seems a very small return for the great love I bear to you, to be kept at a distance from the Person and Presence of the Woman in the World that I value the most •, and if you love me with as much Affection as 1 hope you do, I am Sure the distance of our Two pcrsons would be a 
[6] 
little uneasy to you. Tho’ this does not belong So much to the mistress as the Servant. Confider well, my miftress, how greatly your Absence grieves me j I hope it is not your Will that it should be So j but if I heard for certain, that you yourself desired it, I could do no other than complain of my ill Fortune, and by Degrees abate my great Folly, and So for want of time I make an end of my rude Letter, desiring you to give credit to this Bearer in all he will tell you from me. Written by the Hand of your entire Servant. 
iiitttttiittiitititttttti 
L E T T R E III 
J ’ entluye que j^avois dii doubte de votre fan ^ th me troubla <& egarra beaiicoup^ et Eeuffe efe gere quiete sans avoir sue la certainth., mats piiifque iiancors 71 avez rien fentu.^ f efpe re qiiil eft aomme de nous. Car nous eft ant a jvaltan., deux vuftyres, deux verses de vham hre., votre frere mefter Treforere ont tomb malades (IF font d afture de tout sains ^ nous fious sums reboutes envotre me fons de Hondfon, la on ious ?ious sums bie?i trouves., sans aucun malade pour fteure.^ dieu soit hue., et je petife que ft vous vous voulez re tirer du lieu du Surye, comme ious fmes, vous le pafferez Cans datwer. aufifi unp. rmtvp. 
C 7 3 
chose vous pent comforter., car a la verite com me il vift., pen ou nujie same out este fnalade et que encore plus efl nul de mfre Cort CIF peu aiueurs en meimt., par quoy je vous supply ma entiere aymee de non avoir point de peure., nz de noflre ahfence vous trap ennuyere. Car ou que je foye, votre fuis, non ohfant il faut alcune fois a telles fortunes oheyer. Car qui contre fortune veut luter en tel endroit eji bien souvent tatit plus eloigne, par quoy recomfortes vous et soyez, hardy., et vuidez> le mol tant que vous pourrez, Et f efpere bientot de vous fair chanter le renvoye non plus pour afeure de fau -- tfdu temps., ft tioti que je vous fouhaitte entre mes brass., pour vous ofer ung peu de vos dear fonable penses. Efcrite de la main de iceluy^ 'qui eji et toujours fera votre 
amiable. 
I 
. ■- #■ — _ _ -- -- -- -- - 
Trmfation of LETTER III 
uneasiness my Doubts about your, * Health gave me disturb’d and frighted 
me extremely, and I should not have had any quiet without hearing a certain Account. But now since you have yet Selt nothing, I hope it is with you as with us, for when we were 
at tvaltan. twoitshpr? t xxrn t7}/jlatf 
[ 8 ] 
and your Brother Master treasurer fell ill, and are now quite well and since we are returned to your house at Hondfon., ''wt have been perfectly well, God be praised, and have not at present one sick person in the Family 5 and I think if you would retire from the Surry fide, as we did, you would escape all Danger. I'here is another thing that may comfort you, which is, that in truth in this Distemper few or no Women have been taken ill, and besides, no person of our Court, and few elsewhere have dyed of it. For which Reasons I beg you, my entirely beloved, not to frighten yourself, nor to be too uneasy at our Absence. For where ever I am, I am yours, and yet we must Sometimes Submit to our mis fortunes, for whoever will struggle against Fate, is generally but So much the farther from gaining his end, wherefore comfort yourself, and take Courage, and make this Misfortune as easy to you as you can, and I hope shortly to make you fing for joy of your recall. No more at present for lack of time, but that I wish you in my Arms, that I might a little dispell your unreasonable Ishoughts. Written by the Hand of him who is, and always will be yours 
my H. Rex Lovely[ 
[ ] ^ 
^ O O ni a ^ o •«> ^’y r ^ 

L E T T R E IV 
jc A dehatmit de par moil conteniie de vos Letters me fuis mis en grande agonte nort fchachard. comment les entendre ou a mon defa v ant age cothme en des aiicunds autre s je les entendrej vous suppliant de Men bon coeur me vouloir certifiere apprefent votre intention enth ere touchant V amour entre nous deux. Car necefjttc me contraint de pourchaffier cette re ponce.^ ayant efle plus qvtung annee atteinte du dard d amour non eft ant afiltre de faliere oil tmouver place en votre coeur dh affebioru Certain le quel dernier point in en a guard depuis peu temps en a de vous point nommer ma mai trejfie avec ce qiie ft voiis northeast m aymes P autre fortj que d' amour commune yn.lis fdl vous plait de fair /’ office d’ ime vraye loyalle me fires dh' Anye.^ df de vous dormer Corps d Coeur a moy qui veus eftre da este votre tres loyal serviteur (ft par riguer northeast me de fend of') je vous promes que non feulement le nom vous fera deu.^ mais aussi vous prendray pour met Mefrejfe en rebutt ant tres t antes autres aupres devous hors de pense dv d' affebion., S" de vous feulement fervire Vous suppliant me fair en tiere response a cette ma rude lettre a quoy df €n Quoy me piiis Her & northeast vous plait de trie 
[ 
fair response par efcrite^ affeure nioi quelque lieu la ouje la pourroy avoir de bouche., df js my trouveray de bieti bon coeur. Non plus de peur de vous enuyer, Efcrite de la main de celuy qm volontiers de meureroit votre 
/ 
Tranjlatioti n' L E T T E R IV 
T? Y turning over in my Thoughts the contents of your last Letters, I have put myself into a great Agony, not knowing how to understand them, whether to my Disadvantage, as I understood Some others, or not ^ I beseech you now, with the greatest earnest ness, to let me know your whole Intention as to the Love between us two. For I must of necessity obtain this Answer of You, having .been above a whole Year struck with the Dart of Love, and not y et Sure whether I shall fail, or find a Place in your Heart and affedion. This Uncertainty has hindered me of late from naming you my mistress, since you only love me with an ordinary affedion but if you please to do the Duty of a True and Loyal mistress, and to give up yourself, Body and 'Heart to me, who will be, as I have been your most T, ovnl .Servant _ Sif 
[ n ] 
your Rigour does not forbid me) I promise you that not only the Name shall be given you, but also that I will take you for my mistress, casting off all others that are in competition with you, out of my Thoughts and Affestion, and Serving you only I beg you to give an entire xvnswer to this my rude Letter, that I may know on what and how Sar I may depend. But is it does not please you to an swer in Writing, let me know Some Place, where I may have it by Word of Mouth, and I will go thither with all my Heart. No more for fear of tiring you. Written by the Hand of him who would willingly remain Yours, 
II Rex 
L E T T R E V 
E V etrene ft belle que nen plus (not ant le tout) je vous remercy tres cordialement n07t feulemej^ pour le beau Diamatide CV na -- Eire en quoy la feulette Damoifelle ef tourment man principalement pour la belle interpretation., df trop humble fubmijfon, par votre benignite en cette cafe use, bien pensant, que meriter ce la per occasion me feroit sort ciifcile.^ ft me rt eftoit en ayde votre grande humanite df faveur 
is I yv t rtl 1 ri y 1a aia y. A 1a rtmm A 1a .■% A 1a a am a 1a a 
ay par toutes bontes a moy pofjibles dy demeu -- fer en quelle monefpoir a nils fon ininmahle intention qui dit., aut illic aut nuilibi.l^r demon jlrances de votre affebion font telles., les belles mots de lettre ft cordiallement couches qui m obligent a tout janmis vrayement de vous honour er., aymer CF servir, vous suppliant le voii lotr continuer en ce mefme ferine confant proposyjous affeurant que de nia part je /’ aug menteray plufot que la fair reciproque.^ ft loy auth du coeur le peut avancer.vous pkiant aussi que ft aiicunement je vous ay per cy devant off'eijce que vous me donnez la mefme absolution que vous demandes., vous affeurant que r/’ oranavdnt a votes feule mon coeur fern dedie.^ defrant fort que le corps ayif pouvoit.^ dmt le peut fair f luy plaita qui je supply ririe fois le ]our pour ce fair. Lfperant que a la long ma.. priere fera ouye ^ defyrant le temps bref., pensant le long jufques au reveiie d" entre nous deux, Efcrite de la main du Secretere qui en ifoeur.^ 
• Corps df Volonte ef 
Votre loyal plus affure serviteur, 
stitre cherche 
Co] 
ft 
♦ 
LETTER V 
P O R a present So valuable that nothing ^ could be more (considering the Whole of it) I return you my most hearty Thanks, not only on account of the costly Diamond, and the Ship in which the Solitary Damsel is tos fed about but chiefly for the fine Interpretation, and too humble Submifiion which your goodness hath made to me. For I think it would be very difficult for me to find an Occasion to deserve it, if I was not astisted by your great Humanity and Favour, which I have sought, do Seek, and will always Seek to preserve by all the Services in my Power j and this is my firm Intention and Hope, according to the Motto, Aut illic aut nullihl^ (either here or nowhere). The Demonstrations of your Affestion are Such, the fine Thoughts of your Letter fo cordially expressed, that they Oblige me for ever to Honour, Love, and Serve you sincerely, beseeching you to continue in the same firm and constant purpose I) and affiuring you, that on my Part, I will not only make you a Suitable Return, but out do you in Loyalty of Heart, if it bo possible. I desire you asso, that if at any time before this I have in any sort Offended voq. von would vive me the same Absolution[ 
[ 
which you ask, assuring you, That hereafter my Heart shall be Dedicated to you alone, I wish my Body were So too, ' God can do it if he pleases, *, whom I pray once a Day for that endi ^ hoping that at length my Prayers will be heard I wish the Time my be short, but I shall think it long, till we shall See one another. Written by the Hand of the Secretary, who in Heart, Body and Will, is. 
Tour loyal.y and mojl ajfured Servant., 
H. no other seeks Rex. 
* 
LETTER VI oainal. 
o 
THE Reasonable Request of your last let ter, with the Pleasure I also take to. know them, causes me to Send you now this Newes. The legate, which we most desire, arrived at Paris on Sunday or Monday last past 5 So that I trust, by the next Monday to hear of his Arrival at Calais : And then I trust, within a while after, to enjoy that which I have So long longed for, to god’s Pleasure, and our both Comforts. No more to 
C 15 ] 
lake df Time but that I would you were in myrie Arms, or I in yoursfor I think it long since I kyft you. Writne after the Killing of an Hart, at XI of the Clock : Minding with god’s Grace tomorrow, mightily tymely to kill another, by the Hand of him, which I trust shortly shall be yours, 
####### 
L E T T E R VII original 
tpjarling, tho’ I have fkant Leisure, yet re membring my Promise, I thought it convenient to certify you breeyly, in what Cafe our Affairs stand. As touching a Lodging for you, we have gotten wone by my Lord cardinal’s Means, the like whereof could not have been fond hereabouts for all Causes, as this Bearer shall more show you. As touching our other Affairs, I ensure you there can be no more done, nor more Diligence used, nor all manner of Dangers better both foreseen and provided for, So that I trust it shall be hereafter to both our Comforts, the speci aliities whereof were both too long to be Writne, and hardly by Meste user to be de 
[•6] 
dared. Wlierefor till you repaire hydder, 1 keep Sorriething in Store, trusting it Shall not be long to. For I have caused my Lord your Father to make his Provisions with Speed. And thus for lake of Time, Darling, I make an end of my Letter, writing with the Hand of him which I would were yours 
, A iris 
E T T R E VIII T 
^eanmoins qvl Papanlene pas a tmg genttu ^ ^ homme pour prendre fa Dame ait lieu de Servante toute fois en suivant vos defirs vo iontiers le vous dutroyeray fit per, cela vous puf ftes trouver moms ingrate en la place per dous choyfie, quiave^ efie dn la place par moy aoif men vous merciant treficordiallement fit wus plete ancore avoir quelque fiouvenance de moy 6. N.R.J, De. R. 0. M. V C Z. 
isent^ ^ 
\ 
[ A ] 
Tranjlation n L E T T E R VIII 
H O’ it does not belong to a Gentleman to take his Lady in the Place of a Servant, however in following your Desires I willingly grant it, that So you may be more agreeably in the Place that you your self have chosen, than you have been in that which I gave you. I shall be heartily obliged to you, if you please to have Some remembrance of me. 6. N. R. I. de. R.O.M.V.E.Z., 
Henry, Rex, 
L E T T E R IX Original. 
\ 
HE Cause of my Writing at this time ^ (good Sweatheart) is wonly to understand off your good Health and Prosperity, whereof to know i would be as glad as in manner mine awne, praying God (that and it be his pleasure) to send us shortly togy der, for I promise you I long for it, howbe it, trust it shall not be long to, and feeing my Darling is absent, I can no less do, than to send her some Fleshe representing my Name, 
[ i8] 
which is Harts Flcshe for Henry prognosticating, that hereafter God willing you must enjoy Some of mine, which if he pleased I wolde were now. As touching your Sisters Matter I have caused Water Welche to write to my Lord mine Mind therein, whereby I trust that Eve shall not have Power to deceave Adam. For surely whatsoever is said it cannot fo stand with his Honour, but that he must needs take her his natural Daughter now in her extreame Neceshty. No more to you at this time mine awne Darling, but that with a Wishe I wolde we were togyder one Evening with the Hand of your 
L E T T R E X 
fois ma Mejires qii*l jie voits fleu de souvenir de la promejje que voits tie sites quant je eftoy dernierement vers vous.^peft a dire de fcavoire de vos bonnes noiwelles ^ de fcavoire refponce de ma derniere Lettre, northeast anamoins time femhle qml appartienne an vraye serviteur( ( que autrement zl northeast pent rien Sc avoir) d’ envoyer fcavoire la salute de fa 
n rr rt 7- ♦ > ts nr 7 
[-9] 
Serviteur je vous envoye cette Lettre, vous Suppliant de me avertir de voire Frofperith, la quelle je prie a Vbieu qu il soit aujji long comme je voudroy la mienne dh' pur vous fair en Corps plus souvent souvenir de moy, je vous en voye par ce porture ung boucke tue hier soir bien tarde de ma main: Efperant que quand vous en niangerez, il vous fouvimdra du chajffeur ainji a faute d^efpace je feray sin a ma Lettre, efcritb de la main de votre serviteur qui bien souvent vous fouhaitte au lieu de votre frere, 
Translation t^letter X 
A Lthough, My mistress, you have not ^ been pleased to remember the promisc which you made me when I was last with you, which was. That I should hear News of you, and have an Answer to my last Letter • yet I think it belongs to a true Servant ( since otherwise he can know nothing) to send to inquire of his Mistresses Healthy, and for to acquit my self of the Ostice of a True Servant, I send you this Letter, begging you 
O O tr\ 
to give nie an account of the State you are in, which I pray God may continue as long in Prosperity, as I wish my own •, and that you may the oftener Remember mei Send you, by this Bearer, a Buck killed late last Night by my Hand, hoping when you eat of it, you will think on the Hunter and thus for want of more Room I will hnake an end of my Letter. Written Jby the Hand of your Servant, who often wishes you in yiaur brother’s Room. 
H, Rex, 
-■ * 
L E T T R E XL 
^vprochant du temps qin m.d.. fi longement dure me rejoyd. tante qicil me femdle presque deja venu, Neamnoins Ventier accomplif. fethedif tie fe perfera tatit que les deux personnes fe fjfemblent,. laquelle Affemhle ejl plus deftre eh. hum endroit qm nulle chose monddine., far que rejoyement peut efre fi grand en ce mbnde comme d avoire la company de cell qui‘ ef la plus cheer amye, sachant aujji qidelle fait la paretlle de fan coat, la hanse du 
7 • - 7. J ^ • 1 ^ 
C 
fern le personage Vahfence du quel ma fait plus grand mal au coeur que ni langue ni d criture peuvent exprtmer., que jamais autre chose excepte cela peut remedier.^ vous fupplk ant ma Mefitiejfe de dire a Monsieur voire peer de ma part que je luj prie d'avancer de deux jours le temps affine qu'il peut ejire en Court devant le vieille term, ou au moins fur le jour prefifche., car autremenl je penferay qvcil northeast feroyt point Le tour des amoureus qiiil du soit ni accordant a mon expesation. Non plus diafleure de faulte de temps. Efperant bien tote que de bouche vous diray be rest des peines par moyen votre absence foufenues, Efcrite de la main du fecretere qui fe souhaite d*afeure privement apres de vousqui ejl qua jamais fera 
Votre Loyal & plus - asture Serviteur 
autre IIS cherche 
‘ .0^: ^. ■ '. \, /.■ ■ Tranflatidn L E T T E R XT. 
tfle of the Time which J have 
So long Wpeded, rejoyces me So much, 
the entire Accomplishment cannot be till the two Persons meet, which Meeting is more desired by me than anything in this World ^ for what Joy can be greater upon Earth, than to have the Company of her who is my dearest Friend? knowing likewise that she does the same on her Part, the thinking on which gives great Pleasure. You may judge what an Efed the presence of that person must have on me, whose Absence has made a greater Wound in my Heart than either Words or Writing can express, and which nothing can Cure but her Return : I beg you, dear mi ftrefs, to tell your Father from me. That I desire him to hasten the Appointment by two Days, that he may be in Court before the Old Term, or at farthest on the Day prefixed *, for otherwise I shall think, he will not do the lover’s Turn, as he Said he would, nor an fwer my Expectation. No more at present for want of Time •, hoping shortly that by Word of Mouth I shall tell you the rest of my Sufferings from your Absence. Written by the Hand of the Secretary, who wishes himself at present Privately with you, and who is, and always will be. 
Tour loyal.y and moji 
ajfured Servant 
H. no other 
[ ^3 1 
L E T T R E XII 
^oiwelles me font en mil foudonement ve~ 
** ^ nues les plus deplefantes qui me pour roient avenir. Car pour trots Causes touchant icelle faut il que je laments : la premiere pour entendre la Malady de ma Meftreffe., laquelle je ejlime plus que tout le monde la fante de quelle je dejtre aiitant comme la mienne ^ ' volotvtiers porter la moitie du votre pour vous avoir guery. La seconde pour la crainte que jay d ejlre ettcore plus longuement prejfe de mon ennuyeux abferts qiii jufques icy nta fait toute Ventime a lui pojftble., quand encore puis juger dh' deliberer de pys fairs., pri ant Lieu qu il men defajfe de ft importune re belle. La troifmne pour ce que le medecin en qui plus me fie efl abfens afieure quant il me pour roit plus grand plaisir. Car j*efpereroy par luy 
& fes moyens de obtenir une de mes pkmcipales joyes en ce mondecefi a dire, ma Meftrejfe guerie, Neanmoins en faute de luy je vous envoy e le seconde & tout, priant dieu que bu entot il vous peut render faine, et adunques je vaymeray plus que jamais, vous priant etre gouverne par fes avis touchant votre Malady, en quoy faisant j’ efpere bientot vous revoire 
mill ^jt> j?? 
. [ ] 
pierres pretieufes dumonde. Efcrite du fecre^ tere qm efiy a f am As fera 
Votre loyal plus 
affure Serviteur, 
tranflationofleti: E.K XII 
HERE came to me in the Night the most affliding News poshble. For I have reason to grieve upon three Accounts, ift^ Because I heard of the sickness of my mi strefsjwhom 1 esteem more than all the World, whose Health I desire as much as my own, and the half of whose sickness I would willingly bear to have her cured. Alj;, be cause I fear I shall suffer yet longer that tedious Absence which has hitherto given me all postible uneafiness, and as far as I can judge, is like to give me more. I pray God he would deliver me from So troublesome a Tormentor. The third Reason is, because the Physician, in whom I trust most, is absent at present, when he could do me the greatest pleasure. For I should hope by him, and his Means, to obtain 
nnp' n f rmr nrinrinal Tmrc in flllq Wnrlsl. tlltt* 
1^5] 
Js. my miftress cured 3 however, in .Default of him, I send you the .Second, and the only one left, praying God that he may Soon make you well, and then I shall Love him more than ever. I beseech you to be governed by his Advices with relation to your illness by your doing which I hope shortly to see you again, which will be to me a greater Cordial than all the precious Stones in the World. Written by the Secretary who is and always will be, 
Tour Loyal and moji 
Ajjured Servant ^ 
LETTER 'Kill. Original. 
QIN C E your last Letters, mine avrn dar ling. Water Welche 'tad.&qx Brown John care Trion of Brearton^ John Cocke the Pothecary, be fallen of the Swett in thishouse^ and thankyd be God all well recovered, So that as yet the Pleague is not fully ceased here *, but I trust shortly it shall by the Mercy of God 5 the rest of us yet be well, and 
1 trrifl' naltp it prt lipr nnt tris nr 
[»6] 
it the least as €afily as the rest have doii* As touching the Matter of Wylton^ My Lord Cardinal hath had the Nunys fedfore him, and examined them. Master mu being present, which hath certified me, that for a Truth, that She hath confested herself (which ive would have had Abbelfe) to have had Two Children by Two Sundry Priests ^ and furder, since hath been keeped by a Servant of the Lord that was, and that not 
long ago. Wherefor I would not for all the Gold in the World clog your Conscience nor mine to make her Ruler of a House which is of fo ungodly Demeanour ^ nor I trust you would not, that neither for Brother nor si ^er^ I should fo dcftain mine Honour or con feehce : And asitcucbang the Pryorefie, or Dame elleni^s Eldest Sister, tho’ there is not any evident Cafe proved against them, and that the pryorelte is foold, that of many Years she could not be as she was named ^ yet notwithstanding to do you pleasure, I have don that neither of them shall have it, but that Some other good and well disposed Woman shall have it: Whereby the House shall be the better reformed (whereof I ensure you it had much need) and God much the better Served : As touching abode at he^ef^ do therein as best shall like you, for you know best what Air doth best with you 5 but I wold it were come thereto ( if it plea 
LI ^ ^ J \ ^ ^ 1^ — I » •: • ^ ^ J ^ w ^ W 
C nl 
that, fer I ensure yoirl think it long, Smhd. 
falleii fiek of the Swett, and therefore: L send yon this. Bearer,, because 1 think youi‘ long to hea3| tydings; ftoin ns ^ as we do io; hkewifofroin ypu, wrmng With the Hand, 
De votve seul'. '. ■ : 
(of Yours only) 
1 .v *! 
LETTER XW. ort^nat. 
JA RLIN G, these shall Be only to ad vertife you, that this Bearer, .and his Fellow, be dispatched With as many Things to compaffe dur Matter, and to hrihg it tp paste as dur Wits could imagine dr devise, which brought to paste,, as L trust by their Diligence it,, shall be, shortly you and 1 shall have our destred End, which should be mpre to my Hearts. easc, and more Qiiietneste iny fdinde, than any pther Thing in this World; as with Gods Grace shortly I trust, shall be; proved, but not So Toon as I would it were, yet I will ensure you there shall be pa iyme lost, that may he wone, and further cannot be done, Pox ultra posse non 'hfl ete: : 
9%' \ ^ I ^ 1^ V V ft ft t Am jy«i.4«v4^ 
[’8] 
him for your Sake to make the more Speed, for 
the Sooner we shall have Word from him the 
sooner shall our Matter come to paste •, and 
thus upon trust of your short repair to lotiion, 
I make an end of my Letter Mine awne Sweete 
heart. Writne with die Hand of him which 
delyreth as much to be yours ?Ss you do to 
have him L ' 
... «'■ 
^ ■ "if' '*•. « 
L B r T E r XV Original. 
. ' L N : L _, ■; - VQ ■: 
A R LING, I heartily recommend me to ^ you, alsertaining you, that .1 am not a little perplexed with Such Things as your Brother shall on my part declare iinto you, to whom I pray you give fil Credence, for it were too long to write. In ndy last Letters I writ to you that I trusted shortly to see yoii, which is better known t London than with any that is ^bput me, whereof I not a little mervelle, but lake of defcreet handling must needs.be she cause thereof No mlire to yoii at this time;, but shat I trust shortly, our Meeting shall not depend upon other Mens light Handlings but 
\'. f '' it - '.if ■. ‘ 
. nnnfi 
C 29 3 
u|on your awrie. Writne with the Hand of his that longeth to be Yours, 
V V 
% 
* 
I. .•. - "i 
LETTER XVI Original. 
* • * 
1^ Y N E awne Sweetheart, this shall be to adyertise you of the great ellingness that I find here finee your departing, Tor I enfiirc you, me thinketh the Tyine longer since your departing now last then I was wont to do a whole Fortnight ^ I think your Kindness and my Fervence of Love causeth it, for otherwise I wolde not thought it possible, that for 10 little a while it, should have grived me, but now that I am coming toward you, me thinketh; my Pains been half released, and also 1 am right well comforted, insomuch that my Book maketh firbstantiaily for my Matter, in writing whereof I have Spent above ini ■ Hours this Day, which caused me now write the shorter Letter to you at this time, because of forac Pain in my Head, wishing my self (Specially an Evening) in iny sweet hearts Arms whqfe pritty puckys I trust shortly to 
I ] 
lylte. Writjig with the h^n4 of him that was, is, and shall be youys by his will,. 
TETTER XVII Original. 
d -, N • ^ ’ : ■ V. 
O inform you what Joy it is to me to undctflandof your gonformabkness with Eeafone, and of the foppreffing of your inutile and vain Thoughts and Fantasies whh the Bridie of Reafonj I ensure you alt the good of this World could not counterpoise for my fa t|sfad: ion, the'knowledge and Certainty thereof wherefore good Sweetheart, continue the same not only: in this, but in all your Doings hereafter, for thereby shals come both to you and me the greatest Quietnefle that may be tri this World. The Cause why this Bearer, staly e|h fo loogv is the Bufinesh that 1 have had to drelte up Cker for youj which I trust; ere long to see you occupye, and then I trust to occupy yours : which Shall be recotdpence enough to me for all my'pains and Labours. The unfayned Sickness of this Welhwilfihg Legate doth foinewhat retard his Accelfe. to ydstp Person, but I trust veryly, wshen God shaft 
[u3 
cond^encfe his Demurr^ Lof I know well where he hath Said (lamenting the Saying and brute that he shall be thought Imperial) that it shall be well known in this Matter, thath© isnot lmp^l. And this for lake of time farewelli Writne with the Hand which nine would be yours, and So is the Heart. 
w... •, 

t, " ', 
X 'i. * • ' 
‘I ' ^ 
- ** -! 
I f i t • • ' 
'* ‘ i ’ 
\ .- 
■. !ii.n«i'! Ill.. i.^j»h»tu>ii"rmip(iiiir n II iii.ni, i,, i ii ^ 
0 ■ 
'[ u J 
■ Vpp eiidi XI 
■ ^ V;; ■■ \ ■;; : .'. 'c ^. ... ’ 
-- -- -- -- — -^^ -- -- -- -- -- V: : ^ ^ -- -- -- ■■ 
LETTERS 
rn «-> f;.. .’T 
^ • i' ^ '■ • -■ V ^ _ 
C, -; FROM 
Anne Bolejn ^ 
T d 
Cardinal WOLSEY. 
LETTER I. 
tv/fy Lord, in my ihoft hum hist. Ref. blessed wife that my Heart can 
Part I. p. 55. think, I desire you to Pardon me that I am So bold to Trouble you with my simple and rude Writing, esteeming It to proceed from her, that is much desirous to know that your Grace does well, as I per 
hx/ fliic that xmn An. tirvnrli 
[ n _] 
I pray God long to continue, as I am most bound to pray ^ for I do know the great Pains and Troubles that you have taken for me both Day and Night, is never like to be recompensed on my Part, but alonely in loving you next unto the king’s Grace, above all Creatures living. And I do not doubt but the daily Proofs of my Deeds, shall manifestly declare and affirm my Writing to be true, and I do trust you do think the same. My Lord, I do affure you I do long to hear from you News of the Legate 5 for I do hope and they come from you they shall be very good, and lam Sure you desire it as much as I, and more, and it were possible, as I know it is not : And thus remaining in a steadfast hope, I make an end of my Letter written with the Hand of her that is most bound to be, 
■■ " ............. 
■ A..., ■. •> 
• •• - • 4* • •.. ' ' 
Pojlfcrip hy K, HENRY. 
‘ i :; V 
The Writer of this Letter would notceafe. 
till she shad caused me iikewife to fetito nay Hand defilring you, r though it be short to take it in good part. epshre you there ds neither of us, but that greasty desireth to see you, and much more joyous fv hear that you shave Scaped .shis Plague sh well, trusting the; Fury thereof to be pattedi Tpeciaily with them 
nrr^rvrl oc. T mn rlo. 
Cul 
not hearing of the legate’s Arrival in France, caufeth us Somewhat to muse,, we trust by your Diligence and Vigilancy (with the Afiistance of Almighty God) shortly to be eased out of that Trouble. No more to you at this time ^ but that I pray God send you as good Health and Prosperity as the Writer would. 
By Tour 
Loving Sovereign and Friend Henry K, 
Tour Humble Servant Anne Boleyn. 
L E T T E R II 
Y Lord, In my most humble wise that my poor Heart can think, I do thank your Grace for your kind Letter, and for your rich and goodly Present, the which I shall never be able to deserve without your Help, of the which Shave hitherto had So great Plenty, that all the Days of my Life I am most bound 
^ S? 11 mr • * 
35 3 
love and Serve your Grace, of the which I beseech you never to doubt, that ever I shall vary from this Thought as long as any Breath is in my Body. And as touching your grace’s trouble with the Sweat, I thank our Lord, that them that I desired and prayed for are shaped, and that is the King and You •, not doubting but that God has preserved you both for great Causes known alonely of his high Wisdom. And as for the coming of the Legate I desire that much •, and if it be god’s pleasure, I pray him to send this Matter shortly to a good End, and then I trust my Lord, to recompense part of your great pains. In the which I must require you in the mean time to accept my Goodwill in the stead of the Power, the which Inust proceed partly from you, as our Lord knoweth, to whom I beseech to send you long Life, with continuance in Honour. Written with the Hand of her that is most bound to be. 
Tour Humble and Obedient Servant ',, 
Anne Boleyn. 
... quee^i 
C 1 
^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ 
_ __ ____ s 
een Anne Boleynh Lafl Letter u 
King Henry. 
■ ( ' ■ 
SIR, ^ 
Y OUR grace’s Displeasure,, 
of T gnd my Imprisonment, are. 
‘ Things So strange unto me, as what to Write, or what to excuse, I am altogether ignorant. Whereas you send unto me (willing me to confess a Triith, and fo obtain your Favour) by Such an one whom you know to be mine ancient professed Enemy •, I no Sooner received this Message by him, than I rightly conceived your Meaning *, and if, as you Say, confessing a Truth indeed may procure my Safety, I shall with all will lingnefs and Duty perform your Command. 
But let not your Grace ever imagine that your poor Wife will ever be brought to acknowledge a Fault, where not fo much as a Thought thereof preceded. And to speak a Truth, never Prince had Wife more Loyal in all Duty, and in all true Affection, than you have ever found in Anne Boleyn, with which Name and Place I could willingly have contented my self, if God, and your grace’s Pl.=^qrnrp hppn fn nf="ither did I at 
C 37 3 
on, or received Queenshij), but that I always looked for Such an Alteration as now I find, for the ground of my Preferment being on no surer Foundation than your grace’s Fangr, the least Alteration, I knew, was fit and Sufficient to draw that Fancy to feme other Subject.. have chosen me, from a low Estate, to be your Queen and Companion, far beyond my Desert or Desire. If then you found me worthy of Such Honour, Good your Grace let not any light Fancy, or bad Councei of mine Enemies, withdraw your Princely Favour from me j neither let that Stain, that unworthy Stain of a Disloyal Heart towards your good Grace, ever cast So foul a Blot on your most Dutiful Wife, and the Infant princess your Daughter: Try me good King, but let me have a Lawful Trial, and let not my sworn Enemies sit as my accusers and Judges yea, let me receive an open Trial, for my Truth shall fear no open shame ^ then shall you see, either mine Innocence cleared, your Suspicion and Conscience Satisfied, the Ignominy and Slander of the World stopped, or my Guilt openly declared. So that whatsoever God or you may determine of me, your Grace maybe freed from an open Censure, *, mine Offence being fo lawfully proved, your Grace is at liberty, both before God and Man, not only to execute worthy Punishment on me as a unlawful Wife, but to follow your Astedioh 
[ 3§ 3 
already fettled on that Party, for whose sake I am now asnl am, whose Name I could some good while fiince have pointed unto; Your Grace being not ignorant of my Suspicion therein. 
But if you have already determined of me, and that not only my Death, but an Infamous Slander must bring you the enjoying of your desired happiness ^ then I desire of God, that he will pardon your great Sin therein, and likewise mine Enemies, the Instruments thereof j and that he will not call you to a strict Account for your unprincely and cruel usage of me, at his General Judgement seat, where both you' and myself must shortly appear, and in whose Judgement, I doubt not, (whatsoever the World may think of me) mine Innocence shall be openly known, and Sufficiently cleared. 
My last and only Request shall be. That myself may only bear the Burden of your grace’s displeashre, and that it may not touch the Innocent Souls of those poor Gendemen, who (as I understand) are likewise in strait Imprisonment for my sake. If ever I have found favour in your Sight ^ if ever the Name of Anne Boleyn hath been pleasing in your Ears, then let me obtain this Request j and I will So leave to trouble your Grace any further, with mine earliest Prayers to the Trinity 

[39] 
nity to have your Grace in his good keeping, and to direst you in all your Astions. From my doleful Brifon in the tow£r this 5th of Inajt* 
Tour mojl Loyal and ever \ Faithful Wifi^ 
annboleyn. 
FINIS. 
